Uncertainty in Grain Size Estimations of Volatiles on Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs) and Kuiper with methane (N:CH) ices, the most abundant volatile materials on trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) and Kuiper belt objects (KBOs). We compare the single scattering albedo, which determines the grain size estimation of outer solar system regolith (Hansen 2009), of these ices using the Mie scattering model and two other Hapke approximations (Hapke 1993) in radiative transfer scattering models (RTM) at near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths (1 – 5 µm). The equivalent slab (Hapke Slab) approximation model predicts results much closer to Mie scattering over the NIR wavelengths at a wide range of grain sizes. In contrast, even though the internal scattering model (ISM) predicts an approximate particle diameter close to the Mie model for particles with a 10 µm radii, it exhibits higher discrepancies in the predicted estimation for larger grain sizes (e.g., 100 and 1000 µm radii). Owing to the Rayleigh eﬀect on single-scattering properties, neither Hapke approximate models could predict an accurate grain size estimation for the small particles (radii ≤ 5 µm). We recommend that future studies should favor the equivalent slab approximation when employing RTMs for estimating grain sizes of the vast number of TNOs and KBOs in the outer solar system. Keywords: Classical Kuiper belt objects (250) — Trans-Neptunian objects (1705) — Plutoids (1268) An abundance of methane (CH) and nitrogen (N) ices, among others, have been detected on transNeptunian objects (TNOs) and Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) such as Triton (Cruikshank et al. 1984, 1993) and Pluto (Owen et al. 1993). Eris, a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt, also exhibits a prevalence of Nand CHices on its surface (Dumas et al. 2007). Of these ices, solid CHice has several strong absorption bands in near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths (Cruikshank et al. 2019). The physical and chemical properties of these ices on TNOs and KBOs have been determined from NIR observations using the radiative transfer models (RTM) of Hapke (1981, 1993). The RTMs enable estimation of abundances and grain size of the constituent mixtures based on albedo or reﬂectance of single scattered light by an average surface grain (Mustard & Glotch 2019). For instance, Protopapa et al. (2017) estimated the global scale spatial abundance and grain size distribution of ices (both volatile and non-volatile) on Pluto from Ralph/LEISA infrared spectrometer (Reuter et al. 2008) onboard New Horizons. Varied results have been reported in grain size estimation of water ice at outer solar system icy bodies using diﬀerent scattering models (Hansen 2009). Thus, it is reasonable to anticipate that the estimation of grain sizes of CHand Nices (pure and mixture) on TNOs and KBOs surfaces will have inconsistencies owing to diﬀerent models used. Hansen (2009) argued that the diﬀerences in grain size estimation primarily arise from models used for single scattering albedo calculation rather than bidirectional reﬂectance models. Following the same approach, we use scattering models to NIR optical constants of CHand Nices (pure and mixture) at temperatures relevant to TNOs and KBOs surface conditions. Single scattering albedo can exactly be calculated using Mie theory (Mie 1908) for simple geometric grains or can be estimated using Hapke approximation models (Hapke 1981, 1993) from optical constants of materials. Accordingly, we analyze the single scattering albedo to estimate the inconsistencies in grain sizes using Mie theory and two approximation models from Hapke (1993) that have been widely used in the existing literature. The constituent volatiles ices of TNOs and KBOs surfaces exhibit diﬀerent thermodynamic phase transitions at surface conditions of the planetary bodies. For instance, the crystalline α (cubic) - β (hexagonal) solidphase transition of Noccurs at 35.6K (Scott 1976), while CHI - CHII solid-phase transition occurs at ∼21K (Prokhvatilov & Yantsevich 1983). On TNOs and KBOs surfaces, the CHand Nices form solid solutions and do not coexist as pure substances (Cruikshank et al. 2019). CHand Nices are completely miscible in one another and show two diﬀerent solid solutions such as N diluted in CH(CH:N) and CHdiluted in N(N: CH) (Trafton 2015). In this study, we use the NIR optical constant of pure CH-I ice measured at 39K, as a proxy of methane saturated with nitrogen (CH:N), and nitrogen saturated with methane (N:CH) measured at two diﬀerent temperatures of 35K and 38K. The rationale of using pure CHice as the proxy CH:Nis that at a temperature of 40K, the marginal saturation limit of Nin CHice is ∼0.035 (Cruikshank et al. 2019). In the CH:Nbinary system, the wavelength shift of the CHband is very small on the order of ∼2 x 10µm (Protopapa et al. 2015, 2017). Using optical constants of pure CHice as the proxy of the CH:Nsystem is somewhat valid below 40K (Protopapa et al. 2017) since the saturation limit of Nin CHice is proportional to temperature changes (Prokhvatilov & Yantsevich 1983). At the 35K temperature, the crystalline α (cubic) phase of Nis saturated with the CH-I, while at the 38K, the crystalline β (hexagonal) phase of Nis saturated with the CH-I (Tegler et al. 2010). The single scattering albedo, w, refers to the ratio of the amount of photon scattered to the combined amount of light scattered from and absorbed by a particle: where Qis the scattering eﬃciency and Qis the absorption eﬃciency. The sum of Qand Qis termed the extinction eﬃciency, Q. A highly absorbing material likely exhibits a w = 0 whereas a transparent material is more likely to show a w = 1 (Shepard 2017). In most space science applications, the w is assumed to be the average properties, such as optical characteristics, grain size, and to some extent shape and internal structure, of particles that make up planetary regolith (Hapke 1981). The w is a function of optical constants/ indices of refraction (real, n and imaginary, k) of particles or regolith medium (Mishra et al. 2021). A particle with a larger size and moderate to larger k tends to absorb more incident light, and therefore, exhibits a lower w (Shepard & Helfenstein 2007). A variety of approximate models has been presented by Hapke (1993) to calculate the w from particle refraction indices (Hansen 2009). Of these models, the equivalent slab model (Hapke Slab) and internal scattering/scatterer model (ISM) are widely used in diﬀerent planetary bodies (Li & Li 2011). Subsequent studies (Hapke 2001, 2005, 2012) also presented versions of ISM for surface scattering function that was originally derived from Hapke (1981). We use a version of the approximate ISM and the Hapke Slab models to calculate w from the optical constants of the ices found on TNOs and KBOs. The optical constant (OC) of pure CHand N:CH were chosen based on the thermodynamics equilibrium of solid methane and nitrogen ices at diﬀerent temperatures relevant to TNOs and KBOs surface conditions. As the available data permits, we use the optical constants of α-N:CHat 35K (1- 3.97 µm), β-N:CHat 38K (1 - 5 µm), and CHas the proxy of CH:Nat 39K (1 - 5 µm). The optical constants of pure CHwere collected from Grundy et al. (2002) and the N:CHsystem from Quirico & Schmitt (1992). For detail about the optical constants used in this study see Table 1. Note that the α-N:CHand β-N:CHsystems are the solid solutions with a concentration of <2% CHand the absorption coeﬃcient is normalized to a concentration of 1 for the diluted CHin solutions (for detail refer to Quirico & Schmitt (1997)). The w for particles with simple geometrics (i.e., spherical shape) can exactly be calculated from Maxwell’s equations using Mie theory (Mie 1908) if refractive indices and particle size parameters are known (Moosm¨uller & Sorensen 2018). However, scattering models of highly asymmetric phase functions demand the treatment of diﬀraction eﬀects from Mie w (Hansen 2009). Thus, we use the δ-Eddington corrected Mie single scattering albedow’ as compared to the estimations Note—Optical constants are available at https://www.sshade.eu/ Filename: optcte-Vis+NIR+MIR-CH4cr-I-39K Filename: optcte-NIR-CH4-lowC-alpha-N2-35K Filename: optcte-NIR-CH4-lowC-beta-N2-38K-cor of w from Hapke approximations. The δ-Eddington approximated Mie, w’ can be calculated as (Wiscombe & Warren 1980): where ξ is the asymmetry factor, which refers to the ratio of the forward-scattered light to the back-scattered light, calculated by Mie theory. We employ Mie w calculation following the method described in Wiscombe (1979) using miepython routine, a Python module licensed under the terms of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) license. The calculated Mie w result was then adjusted to δ-Eddington corrected Mie w’ following Eq. 2. The Hapke Slab approximation model is applied if the imaginary part of the optical constant k< <1 so that w can be approximated as (Hansen 2009): where D is the “particle diameter” and α is the absorption coeﬃcient, given by: where λ is the wavelength. R(n) is the reﬂection function of the real part (n) of the OC. The R(n) can be derived as (Hansen 2009): where Sand Sare the average Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcient for externally and internally incident light, respectively (Hapke 1993). For the case of the slab model (k< <1 ), Scan be approximated as (Hapke 2001): and the approximation for Scan be written as (Lucey 1998): We use the ISM (Hapke 1981) as the second approximation method where the w can be reproduced as (Hapke 2001): Θ is the internal-transmission function of the particle is given by: where the near-surface internal scattering coeﬃcient, s = 0, and the internal hemispherical (diﬀused) reﬂectance, r can be given as: The average distance travel by transmitted ray i.e., mean free path of photon hDi as a function of n and particle diameter, D for perfectly spherical particle can be written as (Hapke 2005): In the ISM model, Sis derived from Eq. 7 while Sis a function of both n and k, as given by: To evaluate how the Mie and Hapke models produce diﬀerent w at a speciﬁc particle diameter, we compare w of a 10 µm radius particle for pure CHat 39K, αN:CHat 35K, and β-N:CHat 38K (Fig. 1). The calculated w exhibits small spikes over the wavelengths, and therefore we smoothen our calculated w curves by applying the Savitzky-Golay ﬁlters (Savitzky & Golay 1964), an algorithm typically used for signal processing, with a 3order of the polynomial ﬁt. The result of w from Hapke Slab and ISM calculated for pure CHice shows a varying degree of closeness to the result of Mie calculation at diﬀerent NIR wavelengths (Fig 1a). More speciﬁcally, at shorter wavelengths up to 2 µm, both ISM and slab model exactly follow and mimic the results of Mie calculation. However, at wavelengths of 2.13 and 2.37 µm, the slab model results show slightly higher w than the Mie calculation. This indicates that the Hapke Slab model predicts a slightly smaller pure CHgrain size compared to the Mie model at these wavelengths (Hansen 2009). The ISM w is closer to the Mie result at longer wavelengths at 3.3 and 3.5 µm – indicating a similar grain-size prediction by ISM to the Mie at these wavelengths. In contrast, the Hapke Slab predicts a smaller and larger pure CHice grain compared to the Mie results at 3.3 and 3.5 µm, respectively. At 3.82 µm, both approximation models predicate a slightly higher grain size than the Mie results. The N:CHsystem results (Fig. 1b and 1c) show that the Hapke Slab model, overall, produces w values much closer to the Mie model than ISM at both 35 and 38K temperatures, except at ∼ 3.3 µm wavelength for 38K where the ISM’s w gets closer to Mie. In the α-N:CHice (Fig. 1b), the w calculated from the Hapke Slab model is much closer to the Mie model while ISM predicted a much higher w than Mie calculations over the entire NIR wavelengths. This indicates a much smaller α-N:CHice grain-size prediction by ISM. Likewise, in the case of the β -N:CHsystem (Fig. 1c), the slab model result follows much closer to the Mie result over the wavelengths, except for the 3.3 µm where ISM gets closer to Mie than slab result. This implies that the Hapke Slab model produces a slightly smaller grain size around 2.3, 3.3, and 3.5µm at 35K and 2.3 and 3.5 µm at 38K than the Mie model. Around the wavelength of 3.3µm at 38K, the ISM predicts a slightly smaller grain size than the Mie compared to Hapke Slab to Mie. Overall, for the N:CHsystems, ISM predicts a much smaller grain size than the Mie compared to the slab model to Mie over the NIR wavelengths for the particles with a 10 µm radii. We compare the relative grain size predicted by the approximated Hapke models to the Mie model over the NIR wavelengths. To end that, we ﬁrst estimate the δ-Eddington corrected Mie w’ at grain radii of 1, 10, 100, and 1000 µm. Then we estimate the grain sizes corresponding to these Mie w’ values by applying the inverse ISM and Hapke Slab models. The w is a nonlinear function of diameter (D) in both Hapke approximation models (Eq. 3 and 8). We solve the non-linear equations of Hapke Slab and ISM for D using Powell’s hybrid (dogleg) method (Powell 1970; Chen & Stadtherr 1981). Lastly, we estimate the relative discrepancies in grain size determination by normalizing the estimated grain sizes from the Hapke Slab and ISM models to the Mie grain size for pure CH, α-N:CH, and β-N:CH (Fig. 2). For pure CHice, the Hapke Slab model (Fig. 2a) better predicts the grain sizes than the ISM model (Fig. 2b). Overall, the predicted grain sizes by the Hapke Slab model are within ∼ 20% of the grain size of Mie, whereas the discrepancies in the predicted grain sizes by the ISM model are much higher. However, around the 3.3 µm region, neither model did predict grain sizes very well to Mie’s results. Even though the slab model can predict twice as much as the Mie results at some wavelengths, for instance, at around 2.3∼2.4 µm region for larger grain sizes (e.g., 1000 µm radii), the ISM predicated results still show much more discrepancies than slab model results at these wavelengths. The continuous rise of the 1 µm curve is due to largely the Rayleigh effect (Hansen 2009) from the Mie model that the Hapke Slab method does not model. Likewise, the Rayleigh eﬀect on single-scattering properties is not modeled by the ISM. Both Hake Slab and ISM provide a better prediction at 10 µm grain size, within ∼30% of the grain size of Mie. However, larger grain-sized were not modeled very well by the ISM and predicted the grain sizes that are many times the grain size of Mie (Fig. 2b). The N:CHsystem results (Fig. 2c, d for 35K and Fig. 2e, f for 38K) show that, overall, the Hapke Slab model has better a prediction, and thus lower discrepancies in grain size estimation to the Mie model than the ISM model. Owing to the Rayleigh eﬀect on singlescattering properties modeled by Mie theory (Hansen 2009) but not by either of the approximation models for smaller grain sizes (e.g., 1 µm), there is a trend of continuously increasing discrepancies in grain sizes estimation by both Hapke Slab and ISM. Similar to the case Figure 1. Plots for single scattering albedo of pure CHat 39K (a), α-N grain 10 µm radius. The dashed solid line presents δ-Eddington corrected Mie, dashed yellow represents ISM, and the dotted green represents Hapke Slab results. The plots were smoothened using the Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter (Savitzky & Golay 1964). of CHice, both Hapke Slab and ISM models ﬁt best at 10 µm, where it is within ∼30% of the Mie result, for the α-N:CHand β-N:CHices. For larger grain radii (e.g., 100 and 1000 µm) the Hapke Slab exhibits comparatively lower discrepancies than ISM results and predicted grain sizes within the twice of the Mie over most of the NIR wavelengths, except at 3.3µm for both temperatures. In contrast, though ISM models a good ﬁt at 10 µm, the larger particles (e.g., 100 and 1000 µm) exhibit higher degrees of discrepancies compared to the Hapke Slab results to Mie. This characteristic result from the N:CHsystem is also consistent with the result for water ice grain sizes of Enceladus (Hansen 2009). The distribution of absorption coeﬃcients (α) of pure CHand CHsaturated with Nices over the NIR wavelength region is given in Fig. 3. Absorption coeﬃcients of pure CHshow a peak around the 3.3 µm wavelength (Fig. 3a). Though absorption coeﬃcients are quite similar for N:CHsystems both 35 and 38K, at the latter temperature (Fig. 3c), absorption coeﬃcients at around 3.3 µm wavelength are much higher than the former temperature (Fig. 3b). Pure CHand β-N:CHice show a similar higher absorption coeﬃcient at 3.3 µm wavelength. The anomalies in grain size prediction of larger particles by the Hapke Slab method for pure CHand β-N:CHat 3.3 µm are, perhaps, due to the larger k value at this NIR wavelength region. The absorption coeﬃcient peak at 3.3 µm at 38K and 39K are consistent with the fact of lower single scattering albedo or higher absorption. This is also evident in the relative grain-size curve for 10 µm, the best grain size prediction by the Hapke approximated models. The grain-size curves at 38K (Fig. 2a, b) and 39K (Fig. 2e, f) follow a continuum over the NIR wavelengths except for a “dome” in the 3.3 µm region – indicating a predicted larger grain size corresponding to higher absorption. We compare α from our result to that of water (HO) ices in outer solar system bodies as given in Fig. 4 of Hansen (2009). Water ice has a higher absorption coeﬃcient in most NIR wavelength regions compared to both pure Figure 2. Grain sizes determined from the Hapke Slab (left column) and ISM (right column) using spectra calculated using the Mie model at diﬀerent particle radii of 1, 10, 100, 1000 µm for pure CH row), and β-N:CHat 38K (bottom row). The resulting grain sizes are normalized to the input grain sizes. The plots were smoothened using the Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter (Savitzky & Golay 1964). CHand N:CHsystems. This implies that pure CH and N:CHice grains have higher reﬂectance and lower absorption compared to water ice grains over the NIR wavelengths. One possible interpretation of this comparison is that grain size estimation of HO ice using the Hapke approximation models may predict relatively larger grains compared to pure CHand N:CHices grains at the outer solar systems bodies. However, this interpretation is based on the distribution of absorption coeﬃcient over NIR wavelengths, while other factors are involved, diﬀerent interpretations are also plausible. We analyze characteristic distribution w as a function of α for Mie, ISM, and Hapke Slab models. The w Figure 3. Absorption coeﬃcient of pure CHice at 39K (a), CH β- Nice at 38K (c). Pure CHhas an absorption coeﬃcient peak at 3.3 µm. The absorption coeﬃcient is much higher over the wavelength around 3.3 µm at 38K compared to 35K for CHsaturated with N verses α for pure CH(left column), α-N:CH(middle column), and β-N:CH(right column), ices at diﬀerent grain radii (in rows) are given in Fig. 4. In 1 µm gain size graphs (upper row of Fig. 4), the Mie calculation follows two diﬀerent paths, and their separation is largely due to the Rayleigh scattering eﬀect at smaller grain-sized particles (Hansen 2009). At all temperatures, each approximation model follows a relatively linear path while one of the Mie paths shows a slightly exponential fall of albedo for pure CHand β-N:CHices plots. In the N:CHsystems, the Hapke Slab and ISM models follow a relatively similar path. However, one of the routes of Mie plots follows closely to the Hapke Slab and ISM plots for pure CH. Most of the weakly absorbing points with higher single-scattering albedos are located below the absorption coeﬃcient of ∼ 0.07 µmin pure CHand β-N:CHices, whereas below 0.03 µmin α-N:CHice. There is an exponential drop in the single scattering plots for 10 µm graphs at all temperatures and thermodynamics ice phases of methane and nitrogen (2 saturated with α-Nice at 35K (b), and CHsaturated with row of Fig. 4). The Rayleigh scattering eﬀect (i.e., two separate routes of Mie plots) is also evident here, but in the weakly separated routes. The plots of Hapke Slab and ISM approximate models follow along (similar trend) one of the Mie paths for all thermodynamic pure and mixture ice phases –indicating a close ﬁt of these approximates models to Mie result at this grain size. There are few points beyond the absorption coeﬃcient of 0.07 µm, that we consider roughly the exponential breakpoint, for pure CHand β-N:CH, whereas this breakpoint is ∼0.03 µmfor α-N:CH. For the 100 µm plots (3row of Fig. 4), there is a steep decline of the plots for all phases. Neither of the approximation models consistently follow the Mie route; at some absorption coeﬃcient values, ISM gets closer to Mie while at other points Hapke Slab model closely follows the Mie path. The breakpoint of the steeply declined plots is roughly around 0.01 µmand most of the absorption points reside below this threshold where single scattering albedo value varies in a wide range (e.g., w = 0.1 – 1.0). In the 1000 µm plots (lower row of Figure 4. Plot of the single scattering albedo against absorption coeﬃcient for pure CH -N:CHparticle at 35K (middle column), and β -N:CHparticle at 38K (right column). The subplots show the distribution of w at grain radii at 1 µm (upper row), 10 µm (2row), 100 µm (3 the scattering albedo from the Mie calculation (blue), ISM (yellow), and Hapke Slab (green). The Mie calculation follows two diﬀerent paths due to the Rayleigh scattering eﬀect at lower grain-size particles. Fig. 4), the single scattering albedo plots more steeply decline at all thermodynamics ice phases of methane and nitrogen. However, the breakpoint of the albedo plots is < 0.01 µm, meaning the single scattering albedo steeply falls at a lower absorption coeﬃcient for larger grain sizes. Similar to the 100 µm plots, in 1000 µm plots neither of the approximation models consistently follow the Mie route. Amidst inconsistent results in the grain size estimation of water ice on outer solar system bodies (Hansen 2009), we analyze the relative diﬀerences of grain size row), and 1000 µm (bottom row). In all subplots, estimation for pure CHand N:CHices relevant to TNOs and KBOs. We calculate the single scattering albedo using Mie and two other Hapke approximations models for these ices at NIR wavelengths. Compared to ISM, the Hapke Slab approximation model predicts much closer results to Mie scattering results. In pure CHice, the overall estimated grain size diﬀerences between the Hapke Slab and ISM are about 10% for the particles with diﬀerent grain radii, except in the case of larger particles and longer wavelengths where the imaginary part of the refractive index is much larger. Similarly, in N:CHsystems, the average diﬀerences between the estimated grain sizes from Hapke Slab and ISM are around ∼20% for wide ranges of grain size. Both Hapke Slab and ISM were found to be appropriate models for a grain size radius of 10 µm. For smaller grain-sized particles (radii of ≤5 µm), neither approximate model predicts an accurate grain size due to the Rayleigh eﬀect. For larger grains at longer wavelengths, particularly at wavelengths with higher absorption coeﬃcient values, the ISM predicted grain sizes exhibit larger anomalies compared to the Mie result. Overall, the results estimated prediction at diﬀerent grain sizes indicate that the Hapke Slab model is the more wellpredicted model to the Mie result over the NIR optical constants of pure CHand N:CHsystems while ISM’s predictions show higher discrepancies. Existing literature indicates that the discrepancy in grain-size determination for larger particles at longer wavelength using the ISM can be mitigated by ﬁne-tuning the value of free parameters. For instance, Roush et al. (2007) used an increased value of s in their Eq. 2 and 3 from 10to 1.25 cmto ﬁt the modeled spectrum of gypsum power to measured spectrum (Hansen 2009). The particle diameter in the Hapke Slab model is associated with a scaling factor that varies from 3/4 to 4/3 (Hansen 2009). In ISM, similar uncertainty in selecting the mean free path of photon hDi by using diﬀerent scale factors to eﬀective grain size D. For instance, for spherical particles, hDi can be approximated to∼=0.9D (Hapke 2012), 2D/3 (Melamed 1963), etc., while for irregular particles hDi = 0.2D (Shkuratov & Grynko 2005). This study uses a scale factor of 1 in the Hapke Slab model. We use the mean free path of photon hDi calculated from eﬀective grain size (D) and the real part (n) of the refractive index using Eq. 12. The Hapke Slab and IMS can, therefore, be improved by ﬁne-tuning the scale factors to the approximate models. The slab model accounts only n while the ISM considers both the n and k parts of the refractive indices in the calculation of the average Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcients. If the internal scat- List of notation and symbols used in this paper hDi mean free path of a photon D particle diameter ξ asymmetry parameters of Mie theory k imaginary part of the refractive index n real part of the refractive index r internal diﬀused reﬂectance R(n) reﬂection function tering coeﬃcient, s is set to 0, the internal hemispherical (diﬀused) reﬂectance, r equals 0. However, the relationship between the internal scattering coeﬃcient (s) and eﬀective particle diameter (D) has also been expressed as s = 1/D (Sharkey et al. 2019). This relationship also deﬁnes that the number of scattering events within a single grain is set to 1. Consequently, this relationship indicates that the value of s cannot be 0. The application of the scattering (and absorption) properties of Mie spheres has been shown to be satisfactory for varied non-spherical particle shapes (Grenfell & Warren 1999; Neshyba et al. 2003; Grenfell et al. 2005). The Mie formulation accurately predicts the scattering properties of equivalent spheres of particles, even it can produce satisfactory scattering results for irregular particles (Neshyba et al. 2003). Thus, the size of spherical particles from the Mie model can somewhat be analogous to non-spherical particles (Hansen 2009). Moreover, the Mie scattering formulation properly accounts for the Rayleigh eﬀects of scattering properties for smaller particle sizes that are ignored by the Hapke approximation models. Therefore, based on our results, we recommend using the Mie calculation for radiative transfer modeling to unknown spectra of TNOs and KBOs. Our results show that the Hapke Slab approximation model, overall, well predicts the grain size to the Mie model over the NIR wavelengths. Thus, if the Hapke approximation models are to choose, we suggest using the equivalent slab model over the internal scattering model in estimating the pure CHand N:CH ice grain sizes on trans-Neptunian objects and Kuiper belt objects. Our study provides a guideline for the future application of RTM in estimating the ice grain sizes at TNOs and KBOs. The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their useful comments. s internal scattering coeﬃcient SFresnel reﬂection coeﬃcient for externally incident light, SFresnel reﬂection coeﬃcient for internally incident light, w single scattering albedo w’ δ-Eddington Mie single scattering albedo α absorption coeﬃcient λ wavelength Θ internal transmission coeﬃcient