The diverse near-Earth radiation environment due to cosmic rays and solar radiation has direct impact on human civilization. In the present and upcoming era of increasing air transfer, it is important to have precise idea of radiation dose eﬀects on human body during air travel. Here, we calculate the radiation dose on the human body at the aviation altitude, also considering the shielding eﬀect of the aircraft structure, using Monte Carlo simulation technique based on Geant4 toolkit. We consider proper 3D mathematical model of the atmosphere and geomagnetic ﬁeld, updated proﬁle of the incoming particle ﬂux due to cosmic rays and appropriate physics processes. We use quasi-realistic computational phantoms to replicate the human body (male/female) for the eﬀective dose calculation and develop a simpliﬁed mathematical model of the aircraft (taking Boeing 777–200LR as reference) for the shielding study. We simulate the radiation environment at the ﬂying altitude (considering geomagnetic latitude in the range of 45-50 of the aircraft. Then, we calculate the dose rates in the diﬀerent organs for both male and female phantoms, based on latest recommendations of International Commission on Radio logical Protection. This calculation shows that the sex-averaged eﬀective dose rate in human phantom is 5.46 µSv/h, whereas, if we calculate weighted sum of equivalent dose contributions separately in female and male body: total weighted sum of equivalent dose rate received by the female phantom is 5.72 µSv/h and that by the male phantom is 5.20 µSv/h. From the simulation, we also calculate the numerous cosmogenic radionuclides produced inside the phantoms through activation or spallation processes which may induce long-term biological eﬀects. Keywords: Radiation dose, Galactic Cosmic Ray, Atmospheric radiation, Radiation dose at aviation altitude 1. Introduction are Galactic Cosmic Radiation (GCR) and Solar Particle Events (SPEs). The particles and radiation have a wide energy range spanning from few MeV to above 10 origin of these particles depend on their energy. The low energy radiation observed below about 100 MeV are mainly from solar origin. However, during the SPEs (Reames, 1999) the energy of the solar particles or radiation due to coronal mass ejection or solar ﬂares, can extend up to several GeVs and the ﬂux can last from an hour to days (Gopalswamy et al., 2006). On the other hand, GCRs of Galactic or extra-galactic origin, while propagating through the heliosphere, interact with the electromagnetic ﬁeld carried by the solar energetic particles, which modiﬁes the intensity of low energy GCR particles up to the energy of several GeVs (Gaisser, 1990). The heliospheric space-radiation environment is highly dynamic and strongly correlated with solar activities. spatial distribution of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld (St¨ormer, 1955). The charged particle (spectral and spatial) distribution is modiﬁed by the geomagnetic ﬁeld surrounding the Earth which also depends on the solar activity. There is a strong dependence of the rigidity cut-oﬀ of the primary GCR and SPE particles on the geomagnetic latitude and solar activity (Bazilevskaya & Svirzhevskaya, Two major inputs controlling the near Earth space radiation environment GeV with decreasing ﬂux as the energy increases. The nature and The intensity of space radiation near Earth depends on the strength and 1998; Sarkar et al., 2017). After entering the Earth’s atmosphere, the radiation and particles interact with the atmospheric molecules, producing a large number of secondary particles in cascade, which is known as extensive air shower. Due to the balance between the production rate of the secondary particles and their absorption in the atmosphere, the particle ﬂux has a maximum at around 1520 km altitude (also depends on the geomagnetic latitude), which is called the Regener-Pfotzer maximum (Regener & Pfotzer, 1934). The particle ﬂux starts to decrease below this region. Ray (CR) particles can produce serious biological hazard to high altitude travelers and also can disrupt the microelectronics components in the aircraft. The radiation intensity and hence the induced potential hazard generally increases with altitude and geomagnetic latitude. The CR particles and radiation have enough energy to give a serious amount of radiation dose on human body which may lead to fatal cancer, eye cataracts, cardiovascular diseases, malfunctions of the central nervous system etc. From the study of Bennett et al. (2013) on Air Canada pilots shows that, most of them received annual dose about 3 mSv even a few of them received approx 5 mSv, which is higher than the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) recommended 1 mSv per year limit for public radiation exposure. Due to this high exposure from CR on ﬂight crews, disorder in the reproductive system and high risk of miscarriage among female ﬂight attendants was also observed (Grajewski et al., 2015; Lauria et al., 2006; Aspholm et al., 1999). For these reasons pilots and ﬂight crews are considered as radiation workers by ICRP (ICRP, 2007). Continuous exposure to this kind of radiation can also produce various radioactive isotopes in our body (Brodzinski et al., 1969), where these could cumulatively give radiation dose depending upon their half lives. dosimetry like: equivalent dose (H (E) and ambient dose equivalent (H be found in ICRP publication 103 (ICRP, 2007). As the protection quantities The radiation environment in the atmosphere due to the primary Cosmic There are diﬀerent protection and operational quantities used in radiation like E, H quantity (H tities can be derived using suitable conversion coeﬃcient. However, in many cases ambient dose equivalent cannot properly estimate the eﬀective dose (Ferrari et al., 1997; Sato et al., 1999). empirical models to calculate radiation dose at ﬂight altitude (Bottollier-Depois et al., 2012). But there are signiﬁcant number of uncertainties associated with these kind of calculations which is summarized in ICRU (2010) and EURADOS report (Lindborg et al., 2004a). Also, there are a limited number of studies that consider the eﬀect of aircraft structure for dose calculation (Battistoni et al., 2005; Ferrari et al., 2004; Dyer et al., 2003; Dyer & Lei, 2001). These calculations also have several limitations associated with them like, considering the isotropic distribution for ﬂuence to dose calculation and ﬁxed vertical cut-oﬀ rigidity instead of direction dependence of cut-oﬀ rigidity. organs of ﬂight crews and a few study on the shielding eﬀect of aircraft structure. These studies can be important for planning the radiological protection. In this concern, we develop a computer simulation program based on Geant4 (Agostinelli et al., 2003) Monte Carlo simulation toolkit to calculate the absorbed dose rate, equivalent dose rate in individual organs, organ weighted sum of equivalent dose rate for both male and female body as well as the sex-average eﬀective dose rate at aviation altitude radiation environment. The change in particle ﬂuxes inside the aircraft due to the shielding eﬀects of the aircraft structure also have been studied here considering full-scale aircraft model. of radiation dose at the aviation altitude. We present and discuss the simulation results in Sec. 3. And ﬁnally conclude in Sec. 4. cannot be measured directly in the human body, so the operational There are diﬀerent computer programs based on Monte Carlo calculation or There is no experimental or calculated radiation dose data at individual In the following Sec. 2, we describe the simulation method for the calculation 2. Simulation Method for Dose Calculation of calculations. First, we calculated the radiation environment at the relevant altitude for which we need to consider proper models for the Earth’s atmosphere, geomagnetic ﬁeld and distribution of the primary GCR. To simulate the radiation environment inside the aircraft, we need to consider a proper structure of the aircraft. Similarly, to calculate the radiation dose in human body, proper computational description of the human phantom is required. We also need to consider the underlying physics processes properly to deﬁne the radiation interactions with matter. 2.1. Simulation of secondary radiation environment in atmosphere due to the interaction of primary GCR with Earth’s atmosphere. Here, in this work we did not consider the sporadic eﬀects due to the high energy particles from SPE. A detailed description of the simulation procedure for primary GCR interaction with the Earth’s atmosphere to produce secondary radiation and particle ﬂuxes can be found in Sarkar et al. (2020). For this simulation purpose, we considered full 3D atmospheric and magnetospheric models and with updated Local Interstellar Spectrum (LIS) (Herbst et al., 2017) for the primary GCR. We used NRLMSIS-00 (Picone et al., 2002) atmospheric model to deﬁne the Earth’s atmosphere up to 100 km altitude from the surface subdivided into 100 concentric shells with thickness equal in logarithmic scale. The Earth’s magnetosphere was deﬁned using: (i) 12th generation IGRF model (Th´ebault et al., 2015) for the inner magnetic ﬁeld distribution and (ii) Tsyganenko Model (Tsyganenko & Andreeva, 2016) for the external magnetic ﬁeld distribution, with proper input parameters. simulate the shower of secondary particles in the Earth’s atmosphere. At the end of 2012, for the ﬁrst time in situ measurement of unmodulated primary The overall simulation of radiation dose at ﬂight altitude comprises a series The secondary CR radiation environment at the Earth’s atmosphere is formed A proper description of primary GCR LIS is very important in order to GCR was possible by Voyager1 (Stone et al., 2013) after crossing the heliopause. Complimenting the PAMELA (Adriani et al., 2013) and AMS-02 (Aguilar et al., 2015) measurements with the Voyager1 measurement, a new model of very LIS, before modulation by the heliospheric electromagnetic ﬁeld, was proposed by Vos & Potgieter (2015). This LIS model was used to derive the diﬀerential GCR ﬂux at 1 AU by Herbst et al. (2017) based on forced-ﬁeld approximation (Caballero-Lopez & Moraal, 2004; Moraal, 2013). We considered this model to describe the GCR ﬂux at the top of the atmosphere with an arbitrary value for the solar modulation potential φ = 524 MV, (which corresponds to a solar transitional phase from maximum to nearing a minimal activity). ﬁeld distribution is an important factor for the calculation of secondary radiation environment in the atmosphere. While, most of the other similar program consider the vertical rigidity cut-oﬀ for the distribution of the primary GCR at diﬀerent locations, we considered the back-tracing method to select the allowed tracks into the atmosphere from the isotropic distribution of particles at the top of the atmosphere (Sarkar et al., 2020). This method takes care of the directional dependence and penumbra region of the rigidity cut-oﬀ. However, for an example, Fig. 1 exhibits the positional distribution of vertical rigidity cut-oﬀ at 10 km altitude. Due to high rigidity cut-oﬀ at the geomagnetic equator, only the charged particles with enough rigidity can penetrate the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and interact with the atmospheric nuclei, while the neutral particles are unaﬀected. dependent geomagnetic modulation was inherently achieved in the simulation as can be seen from Fig. 2. This plot shows primary GCR spectra (for protons and alpha particles) at an altitude of 400 km, averaged over two diﬀerent geomagnetic latitude ranges 0-63.03 AU and modiﬁed LIS at 1 AU (modulated by the electromagnetic ﬁeld carried by the solar wind). We recorded all the relevant information like: position, momentum, energy, type (pdg number) etc. of the generated secondary particles The rigidity cut-oﬀ for the CR charged particles imposed by the geomagnetic Using the geomagnetic ﬁeld model and back-tracing method, the position and radiation in this step of the simulation to be used afterward. 2.2. Human phantom and aircraft model radiations produced in the atmosphere (along with the primaries survived the geomagnetic cut-oﬀ) in the human body and with the aircraft to see the structural eﬀects on radiation dose. considering UF/NCI hybrid phantom models (PHANTOMS library), jointly developed by the University of Florida and National Cancer Institute. These computational models contain more than 100 organs or tissues. More details about PHANTOMS and their compositions can be found in Lee et al. (2009); Griﬃn et al. (2019) and references therein. We can calculate the energy depositions separately in each of the organs and subsequently get the overall eﬀective dose in human body. developed a simpliﬁed mass model of the aircraft structure in Geant4 simulation framework, based on Boeing 777–200LR (Boeing Co., 2020) aircraft model. We sampled the radiation eﬀects at diﬀerent positions inside the aircraft by placing In the next stage of the calculation, we simulated the interaction of secondary The simulation of radiation dose received by human organs has been done To ﬁnd out the variation of radiation ﬂuxes inside the aircraft structure, we dummy volumes (three spheres of 2 m diameter at the front, middle and back sections of the fuselage). A representative picture of the aircraft model along with the dummy spheres can be seen in Fig. 3. A simpliﬁed description of the jet fuel, window glass, cockpit instrumentation has been considered. For the aircraft structure construction, we mainly used 5 mm thick aluminum (1.35 g/cm window glass, cockpit instrumentation) were taken from Ferrari et al. (2004). The full tanks of fuel (145,000 kg) were placed inside the wings and lower half of the fuselage conﬁned along only in the region where the wings are connected to the fuselage. An additional aluminum plate of 5 mm thickness comprised the ﬂoor of the passenger cabin, thus rendering a total equivalent thickness of 2.7 g/cm 2.3. Physics list considered in the simulation radiation interactions with the atmosphere, aircraft structure and human phantom. For this simulation, we considered QGSP BIC AllHP physics list (Geant4, 2020) with updated TALYS-based Evaluated Nuclear Data Library (TENDL), which is appropriate for hadronic interaction and isotope productions. To han- ) and the composition and density of other diﬀerent materials (jet fuel, for the upward going particles. It is important to consider the right set of physics processes to describe the dle electromagnetic interactions, electromagnetic options3 physics list was used, which is suitable for space and medical purposes. 2.4. Simulation of radiation interaction in human phantom and aircraft struculated the radiation interactions in the human phantoms and the aircraft structure. First, to calculate the radiation eﬀect in human body we irradiated the phantoms with diﬀerent secondary GCR particles from upper and lower hemispheres of 2 m radius (without considering the aircraft structure) for both upward and downward going particles and calculated the corresponding deposited doses. We used the standing posture of the phantoms for irradiation, since there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in radiation doses observed in the sitting and standing postures (Alves et al., 2016). eﬀects of aircraft structure, we irradiated the aircraft from two hemispheres ture From the knowledge of radiation environment at the ﬂight altitude, we sim- To ﬁnd out the variation of radiation inside the aircraft due to shielding with 35 m radius along with three dummy spheres inside the fuselage at diﬀerent locations shown in Fig. 3 and recorded the information of each event inside those spheres. ated both male and female phantoms by 10 of particles; while for the simulation of radiation interactions in the aircraft, we considered 10 simulations, we considered the particles with kinetic energy distribution in the range of 10 keV to 800 GeV for downward going particles, while for upward going particles the energy range is 10 keV to 10 GeV. This choice of energy ranges can be justiﬁed by the simulated outcome of the secondary particle ﬂuxes in the atmosphere discussed later in Sec. 3.1. 3.1. Radiation at ﬂight altitude netic ﬁeld carried by the solar wind. At Earth’s vicinity, this modiﬁed GCR is further modulated by the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, while propagating towards Earth through the magnetosphere. The primary particles with modiﬁed ﬂux then interact with the atmospheric nuclei to produce secondary particles and radiation which in turn interact with the aircraft structure. The ﬂux distribution of all the diﬀerent particles generated from the simulation at the ﬂight altitude (which we considered here at 10 km from the Earth’s surface) is shown in Fig. 4. Though, due to the lack of direct experimental measurements of the distribution of radiation ﬂux components at aviation altitude, it is not possible to directly verify the results shown in this ﬁgure. Nevertheless, we compared the simulation results at satellite altitude with AMS observation of proton ﬂux and at balloon altitude with the atmospheric radiation measurement by ICSP balloon borne experiment (Sarkar et al., 2020). Ferrari et al. (2005) mentioned the anisotropy in the distribution of high energy radiation ﬂux components for For the purpose of radiation dose calculation in human body, we irradi- The primary GCR LIS is modiﬁed in the heliosphere, by the electromagdownward and upward particles at aviation altitude, while low energy neutrons and photons < 10 MeV are more isotropically distributed. This fact is also evident from Fig. 4 and also can be seen at balloon altitude as shown in Sarkar et al. (2020). In this simulation, we do not consider the weakly interacting (e.g. neutrinos) and low abundant (K for upward and π radiation calculations were done at 10 km altitude (which is the typical cruise altitude of commercial aircraft, e.g., FL328) and in ∼45 latitude (θ (ICAO, 2016). way and will be considered in future. However, the latitudinal and longitudinal distribution of all the simulated atmospheric particles at 10 km altitude can be seen from Fig. 5 over the whole geographic region. For the current purpose, we consider the ﬂuxes of proton, neutron, γ, e, e, , µ, πand πgenerated from primary GCR interactions with atmosphere. The dose calculation at other regions and altitudes can be done in the same 3.2. Dose calculation in human body at aviation altitude, where T refers to particular organ or tissue type and R refers to type of radiation. The eﬀective dose is calculated according to the equation: where w weighting factor and D ticular radiation type R. The absorbed dose D unit mass. was updated by a new value for proton and introducing more accurate energy dependent continuous function of w in ICRP (2007). But the consideration of constant w other CR ions may not be correct at higher altitudes where the energy and ﬂux of these particles are higher (Banjac et al., 2019). Here in this study, we are to calculate the eﬀective dose (E), equivalent dose ) and absorbed dose (D) rates in human body from radiation interactions is the weighting factor for organ T (Pw= 1), wis radiation The ICRP ﬁrst introduced the set of wvalues in ICRP (1991), which We calculated the total eﬀective dose, as well as the individual contributions from diﬀerent omnidirectional radiation and particles of atmospheric CRs mentioned in Sec. 3.1. The individual contributions from diﬀerent radiation components to the weighted sum of equivalent dose rate is plotted in Fig. 6 for both male and female phantom along with their relative contributions to the total weighted sum of equivalent dose rate. The same values of weighted sum of equivalent dose rates along with their relative contributions are tabulated in Table 1, separated for downward and upward components of incident radiations. This calculation shows that most of the weighted sum of equivalent dose received by the phantom is due to the downward going particles (more than ∼95%), where maximum contribution comes from neutrons followed by proton, γ, e body respectively. Since, the w organs are considered same, Eqn. 2 can be rewritten as: which is the average of weighted sum of equivalent dose of reference male and female. So, for the sake of comparison, we ﬁrst calculated the total weighted sum of equivalent dose rates in reference female and male phantoms and then took the average to calculate the sex-averaged total eﬀective dose rate. equivalent dose rate inside both male and female phantoms are plotted in Fig. 7 and 8. The contributions to absorbed dose rates and equivalent dose rates from diﬀerent primary incident particles in each organs, for both male and female phantom, are also shown in Fig. 9, 10 and 11, 12. Under the same irradiation condition, the dose received by the female phantom is slightly higher than the male phantom. Noticeable diﬀerence in radiation dose rates at diﬀerent organs is quite apparent from these plots. Lund & Jevremovic (2019) also ﬁnd similar , µand π. ICRP (2007) deﬁned the sex-averaged eﬀective dose for reference person as: and Hbeing the equivalent dose in diﬀerent organs of male and female Spatial distribution (frontal and side-wise view) of absorbed dose rate and Particles variation in organ dose using a human anatomical phantom for Apollo 11 and Apollo 14 missions from trapped protons. Using a MC simulation procedure with simpliﬁed phantom model in X-ray radiation environment for medical purpose, Lewis et al. (1988) reported diﬀerent absorption dose rates in diﬀerent organs indicating a ratio more than factor of 2 between colon and stomach. In a recent study of organ dose estimation due to computed tomography, De Mattia et al. (2020) also reported substantial diﬀerence of radiation dose rates in different organs which also support our calculation. However, Reitz et al. (2012) reported more or less ﬂat distribution of absorbed dose rate at diﬀerent organs in human body at the radiation environment on moon with only high energy primary GCRs and using ICRP phantom model. We can speculate the diﬀerential organ doses due to radiation environment at the aviation altitude and organ material distribution in the phantoms (high density and relatively high Z bone material should play a role here). The direct veriﬁcation of the obtained result is diﬃcult due to lack of experimental knowledge and other calculations of dose rate for individual organs at this level. Some future development in this concern with computation or/and experiments can shed more light and verify the results obtained in the current calculation. 1.84 µGy/h (5.16 µSv/h). The equivalent dose limit of eye lens for occupational exposure and public exposure is 20 mSv and 15 mSv per year. So from this simulation, it can be seen that this limit can be exceeded for frequent ﬂiers or aircrews which could increase the chance of eye cataracts. The absorbed dose rate and equivalent dose rate received by the prostate (uterus) of male (female) phantom is 1.25 (1.78) µGy/h and 1.82 (3.21) µSv/h. A recent study by Grajewski et al. (2015) suggests that the risk of miscarriage among the female ﬂight attendant will increase for radiation dose of or more than 0.1 mGy in week 9–13 from conception. The estimated threshold dose for the gestational period can be found in Patel et al. (2007), which is quite high but can be reached during severe solar particle events, Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flash events (Dwyer et al., 2010) or frequent use of ﬂights from high altitude or long haul polar routes. So, The sex-averaged absorbed (equivalent) dose rate on eye lens is calculated as all frequently ﬂying pregnant women or aircrews should take extra care of their fetus during their early gestation. secondary particles, as well as some radioactive nuclei, by interacting with the human body. These radioactive nuclei are mainly produced by spallation reaction of protons and activation by neutrons in our body (Brodzinski et al., 1969). The amount of radiation dose per hour imparted by these radionuclides is negligible, but can be accumulated to give substantial dose for extended exposure time or elevated radiation environment. Because of their radioactive nature, these cosmogenic radio-isotopes are particularly important, as they can be accumulated in some speciﬁc organs due to their physicochemical nature, where it could cumulatively give radiation dose depending upon their biological half-lives which may lead to stochastic detrimental eﬀect like cancer. Despite of the harmful characteristics of the cosmogenic radionuclides, they could be used to accurately measure the radiation dose in the human body (Brodzinski et al., 1969). They have half-lives ranging from less than a second to years. Internal radioactivity is particularly dangerous than the external radiation as the de- The incident energetic particles and radiation produce diﬀerent sub-atomic caying particles or radiations may kill nearby tissue, cells or damage the DNA structure. In the current simulation work we also have calculated the production of radioactive nuclei in human body due to high energy particles or radiation interactions. Most abundant nuclides among all the produced radionuclides in human body are listed in Table 2 along with their half-life, mode of production and abundance. limit to the career exposure of the aircrews due to cosmogenic radionuclides listed in Table 2. For this purpose, we considered the decay of the induced radionuclides at their corresponding position of generation inside human body as obtained from the simulation and calculated the absorbed dose from diﬀerent radionuclides. The total number of radionuclides accumulated in the body is calculated considering overall occupational exposure for 20 and 30 years with 1000 ﬂight hours per year. The number of radionuclides that decay over the lifetime after the exposure (considering 50 years from the median age of occupational exposure suﬀered) to give the radiation dose, depending on the corresponding half lives of the radionuclides. This calculation yields the carrier exposure of about 6 mSv and 9 mSv considering 20 and 30 years of occupational exposures respec- Based on this result, we tried to have a rough estimation of the maximum tively. However, it should be emphasized here that, this calculation is based on the physical half-lives of the radionuclides. But due to various reasons their biological half-lives would be diﬀerent, which should be actually considered in the calculation. Again, the production rates of these radionuclides depends on the location (altitude/latitude) of exposure over the occupational career which also should be considered. 3.3. Radiation ﬂux inside aircraft structure inside the aircraft, along with the ﬂux outside the aircraft structure (i.e., in the free atmosphere), for both downward and upward going particles can be seen from Fig. 13 and Fig. 14. Here, we discarded the downward going π their negligible contribution to the total eﬀective dose rate (see Table 1). The change (in %) of the integral ﬂux (particles m secondary particles (as well as for the total contribution) in both downward and upward directions at diﬀerent positions inside the fuselage with respect to the corresponding ﬂux outside the aircraft, is given in Table 3. The corresponding change (in µSv/h) in eﬀective dose rate in human body is tabulated in Table 4. However, to calculate the eﬀective dose rate at diﬀerent positions inside the aircraft we considered the same ﬂuence-to-dose-rate weighting factor obtained from the dose rate calculation in human phantom in the atmosphere as discussed in Sec. 3.2. of downward going particles are increased in general (with exception for the muons). This may be attributed due to the secondary production by interaction of high energy particles with the aircraft materials have overwhelmed the absorption of the particles in the aircraft shell. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant reduction of particle ﬂux inside the fuselage for upward going particles is discernible from the results. Which is mainly due to the presence of the ﬂoor and central fuel tank. But, since downward particles contribute almost ∼96% to the total eﬀective dose rate, while upward particles contribute only ∼4% (see The simulated ﬂux of diﬀerent secondary particles at three diﬀerent positions From these results, it is apparent that inside the aircraft fuselage the ﬂux Table 1), the reduction of upward particle ﬂux could not eﬀectively reduce the dose rate. In fact this calculation shows about 9.7% increase of total eﬀective dose rate at the center of the fuselage compared to the free atmosphere, while eﬀective dose rate due to neutrons increase by ∼ 6%. The neutron dose rate measurement inside RB57-F military aircraft shows about 10% increment in the radiation dose rate than outside the aircraft Singleterry Jr et al. (1999). In a previous calculation, Ferrari et al. (2005) reported qualitatively similar ﬁndings of slight increment (depending on the position along the fuselage) of radiation dose in side the aircraft due to downward radiation, while the contribution from the upward radiation decremented due to the presence of the fuel and cargo content. However, the dose rate inside the fuselage may also change due to absorption of radiation by the internal structures, seats, passengers and other high-Z materials, which can be studied by MC simulation with detailed geometrical structure of the aircraft from the manufacture and corresponding measurements on board the aircraft. 3.4. Comparison with previous dose calculations received by the female phantom is 5.72 µSv/h, whereas that by the male phantom is 5.20 µSv/h. So the sex-averaged eﬀective dose rate is 5.46 µSv/h. The experimental or calculated dose rates received by the individual organs inside the human body (at aviation altitude), inﬂuenced by the aircraft structure at the geomagnetic latitude and altitude considered in this simulation are not available. So, we could not directly compare our simulated results for absorbed and equivalent dose rates on each organ of the male and female body. However, we bench-marked our simulation at diﬀerent stages of the calculation. lated proton ﬂux at satellite altitude and atmospheric radiation ﬂux at balloon altitude. We also compared the simulated neutron ﬂuence rate at the aviation altitude with the experimental measurement reported by Goldhagen et al. (2002). Fig. 15 shows the neutron ﬂuence rate per lethargy at 20 km altitude and in 1.0 - 1.1 rad geomagnetic latitude, as obtained in this simulation and compared to that measured by Goldhagen et al. (2002) in the same latitude and altitude region. Considering this neutron ﬂuence and conversion coeﬃcients from Pelliccioni (2000), we calculated the eﬀective dose rate (ambient dose equivalent rate) as 7.60 (9.12) µSv/h which is within 10% deviation of the measured value. material distribution considered in the phantom, incident radiation spectra, energy range of the radiation, angular distribution of the incident ﬂux etc. For example, Sato et al. (2009) showed the eﬀect of using diﬀerent source geometries on radiation dose. Here, in this work, instead of using ﬂuence to dose conversion coeﬃcients, using micro-dosimetric technique we explicitly calculated the energy depositions in diﬀerent organs for a wide range of radiation types and energy considering diﬀerent angular distributions for downward and upward radiations. However, to compare our simulated dose rate, we also calculated the eﬀective dose rate using the common conversion coeﬃcients for isotropic irradiation from Pelliccioni (2000) and the values for diﬀerent radiation types are tabulated in This simulation yields that the total weighted sum of equivalent dose rate In Sec. 3.1, we have already mentioned about the validation of the simu- The radiation dose in the human phantom depends on many factors like: Table 5. The comparison shows that the total eﬀective dose rate are within the acceptable uncertainty range, although some deviations in the eﬀective dose rate for diﬀerent particles are noticeable due to above mentioned factors. ambient dose equivalent (H 5 we also presented the H corresponding conversion coeﬃcients. The apparent underestimation of total ambient dose equivalent rate compared to the total eﬀective dose rate can be understandable from the measurement of dose depth distribution aboard a series of ﬂights from Cologne (GER) to Washington, DC (USA) using a quasi tissueequivalent phantom sphere by Vana et al. (2003). This measurement shows that the maximum dose equivalent appears in a depth of 50 to 60 mm rather than 10 mm, implying that H exposure. Similarly, Petoussi-Henss et al. (2010); Veinot & Hertel (2011) showed that above few MeV, H protection quantities. In fact, whether H dose increases. Ferrari & Pelliccioni (1998) also conclude that the only up to a limited energy range H and for high energy neutrons. For the validation of this simulation here we Since, eﬀective dose and equivalent dose are not measurable quantities, so also compere the calculated ambient dose equivalent rate (3.84 µSv/h) in the simulated region (θ reported values of ambient dose equivalent rate in Ploc et al. (2013); Lindborg et al. (2004b); Bottollier-Depois et al. (2012); Lindborg et al. (2004a) which is determined by in-ﬂight measurements through several radiation monitors and in diﬀerent altitude, latitude as well as solar condition. We simply interpolate the reported values for the comparison, which shows that our simulated dose rate is well within the acceptable limit of 30% uncertainty. 4. Conclusions are calculated in this work through MC simulation, using most updated models describing the atmosphere and magnetosphere, CR ﬂux, human phantoms and organ speciﬁc weighting factors. The calculation shows that, among all the incident primary particles, most of the radiation eﬀective dose received by the human body is due to the neutrons, at the location of aviation altitude considered in this simulation. By interacting with the human phantoms secondary CRs also produce diﬀerent cosmogenic radioactive nuclides with half lives ranging from less than a second to years. These radionuclides may give negligible contributions to the total eﬀective dose received per hour during the ﬂight, but can gradually increase with increasing altitude, latitude and exposure time and most importantly can have signiﬁcant cumulative eﬀect over the human lifespan. The calculation also reveals that the dose received by the human phantoms at ﬂight altitude are mostly due to downward directed particles with a small contribution by the upward particles. Comparison of the calculated eﬀective dose rate in this work with that calculated by various other computer codes and measurement as reported in Ploc et al. (2013); Lindborg et al. (2004b); Bottollier-Depois et al. (2012); Lindborg et al. (2004a) shows an agreement well within the acceptable error limit. Study of the shielding eﬀect of the aircraft structure on the radiation dose is very important in aviation safety as this helps The gender speciﬁc radiation dose on the human body and its internal organs us to better predict radiation dose for radiological protection. By considering a detailed aircraft structure Battistoni et al. (2005) showed that, inside the aircraft, decrease of ambient dose equivalent is more signiﬁcant than the decrease of eﬀective dose compared to free atmosphere. Based on this they conclude that eﬀective dose at the free atmosphere can be used for individuals risk assessment. On the other hand great care should be taken to consider the shielding eﬀect on the ambient dose equivalent when compared the calculated value with the measurement. Here, in this simulation, the consideration of the simpliﬁed aircraft model structure with only the outer shell, gives apparently odd result that the eﬀective radiation dose is increased inside the aircraft. But this is understandable from the fact that the high-energy particle ﬂuxes are converted to relatively low-energy particles by the shell material which subsequently contribute to the received dose by the human body more eﬃciently. However, this calculation can be improved by considering the the actual particle ﬂux distribution produced inside the aircraft to calculate the energy depositions in the phantoms, rather than using the ﬂuence-to-dose-rate weighting coeﬃcients obtained from the calculation at the atmosphere outside the aircraft. Moreover, the calculation of radiation dose in human body inside the aircraft can further be improved by considering more realistic internal structure of the aircraft and passenger distribution, which is of course practically very challenging to implement in this kind of simulation. We also thank the Higher Education department of West Bengal, for a GrantIn-Aid which allowed us to carry out the research activities at ICSP. This work has been supported by the SERB (India) project EMR/2016/003870.