Department of Physics, Louisiana Tech University, 600 Dan Reneau Dr., Ruston, USA E-mail: sawyer@latech.edu, connor.h.waits-1@ou.edu, wobisch@latech.edu Abstract: In the standard approach, predictions of perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics for ratios of cross sections are computed as the ratio of ﬁxed-order predictions for the numerator and the denominator. Beyond the lowest order in the perturbative expansion, the result does, however, not correspond to a ﬁxed-order prediction for the ratio. This article describes how exact ﬁxed-order results for ratios of arbitrary cross sections can be obtained. The general method for computations in any order of the perturbative expansion is derived, and results for next-to-leading order and next-to-next-to-leading order calculations are given. The approach is applied to theory predictions for various multi-jet cross section ratios measured at hadron colliders. The two methods are compared with each other and with the experimental data. Recommendations are made how to obtain improved theory predictions with more realistic uncertainty estimates. Measurable quantities, deﬁned as ratios of cross sections, R, are studied for a variety of reasons. Due to the cancellation of uncertainties which are correlated between numerator and denominator, such ratios can often be measured with higher experimental precision and also be more precisely predicted by theory. Among such quantities are normalized distributions where a diﬀerential cross section is divided by its integral, or ratios of production cross sections for diﬀerent processes. Examples for the latter are ratios of multi-jet cross sections in hadron collisions with diﬀerent jet multiplicities, which are frequently used for phenomenological tests of perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics, pQCD, for determinations of the strong coupling constant, α predictions for its running [1–5]. In most cases, phenomenological analyses of experimental data use pQCD predictions in ﬁxed order in α. The pQCD predictions for a ratio R are then typically computed from the ratio of the corresponding ﬁxed-order predictions for the cross sections in the numerator and the denominator. For consistency, both of these are computed at the same relative order in α, i.e. both at leading order, LO, next-to-leading order, NLO, or next-tonext-to-leading order, NNLO, in α. Beyond the LO, however, such computations do not provide exact ﬁxed-order pQCD predictions for the ratio R. In this article, we discuss how the cross section results for the numerator and denominator can be used to compute an exact ﬁxed-order result for the ratio R of arbitrary cross sections. We present the general procedure for any order pQCD, and provide the solutions for predictions at NLO and NNLO. Speciﬁc results for both methods are computed for a set of multi-jet cross section ratios, measured at the CERN LHC and the Fermilab Tevatron Collider. From the comparison of both methods and their description of the experimental data, and based on general considerations, we derive recommendations for theoretical calculations of cross section ratios. We motivate how this can lead to improved predictions with more realistic uncertainty estimates in future phenomenological analyses of cross section ratios. – 1 – A measurable quantity R =is deﬁned as the ratio of two cross sections σ where n and d denote the order of αof the LO contributions to the pQCD predictions (σ∝ αand σ∝ α) and it is assumed that n ≥ d. It is also assumed that the quantity R is deﬁned in bins of an energy or transverse momentum related variable p which is deﬁned for both σand σ. At a ﬁxed value (or in a given bin) of p, the quantity R is given by R(p) =, and it is assumed that in a pQCD calculation the renormalization scale µcan be related to p by the same simple function (like µ σand σ. In other words, in a given bin of p, the ratio R is probing α matrix elements for σand σat the same µ the dependence on p is omitted The perturbative expansions of the two cross sections in orders of αare given by where the pQCD contribution in LO corresponds to i = 0, NLO to i = 1, and NNLO to i = 2. Typically, the “NLO k-factor”, k, for a given quantity is deﬁned as the ratio of its NLO and LO pQCD predictions. For σit is therefore We name the last piece k≡a “reduced NLO k-factor”, since k This deﬁnition is then extended to all orders, such that for each order i, a reduced k-factor is deﬁned asσ With this deﬁnition, the perturbative expansions of σ their LO contributions and their reduced k-factors as σ= σ· (1 + k+ k+ ...) and σ The LO pQCD prediction for the ratio R = pQCD results for the numerator and denominator Beyond LO, however, the pQCD prediction for R can be obtained in diﬀerent ways. In phenomenological analyses of experimental data, the NLO (NNLO) pQCD prediction for R is usually computed from the ratio of the NLO (NNLO) predictions for σ . In the following, for the sake of brevity, – 2 – With (2.4) and (2.5), the NLO result can be written as the NNLO result as and the general expression as where ispeciﬁes the highest order in the pQCD calculations (1: NLO, 2: NNLO, ...). In the following, we refer to the results (2.6)–(2.9), as the “standard” approach. Note that, beyond LO, these ratios do not directly correspond to ﬁxed-order pQCD results for the quantity R. The goal is to obtain an exact ﬁxed-order result for R, in the form To ﬁnd the terms of the sum, we rewrite (2.9) as and expand the right term in a Taylor series The terms of this series are multiplied with the terms in parenthesis in (2.11), and the resulting products are sorted in their powers of α at the corresponding order at which σand σ any order pQCD. To compute a corresponding ﬁxed-order pQCD result for R requires, of course, to compute both σand σat the same corresponding relative order in α NLO, NNLO, ...). – 3 – At NLO, with x = kin the Taylor series, one obtains and at NNLO, with x = (k+ k) in the Taylor series, The individual pieces in (2.13) and (2.14) can simply be computed from the LO and (N)NLO pQCD results from the cross section calculations for σ of Rrequires and the calculation of Rrequires in addition The ﬁxed-order result (2.13) diﬀers from the “standard” result (2.7) due to the truncation of the series of the products of the terms in parenthesis in (2.11) and the terms from the Taylor series. An estimate of this diﬀerence can be obtained from the leading term of the truncated piece. At NLO, this is the term proportional to α from the two methods is This diﬀerence is proportional to the LO result, R for the numerator and denominator. It becomes small if either the NLO k-factor for the denominator is close to unity (corresponding to a reduced k-factor of |k if the NLO k-factors for the numerator and denominator become equal (k interesting to note the asymmetry: For the diﬀerence to become small, it is suﬃcient that the k-factor for the denominator is small while it is not aﬀected by the k-factor for the numerator alone. Based on (2.17), the two k-factors can be used to obtain a quick estimate of the diﬀerence between the “standard” method and the ﬁxed-order result at NLO. In the following, we use the formulae obtained in the previous section to compute NLO pQCD predictions for selected quantities which are then compared to the results from experimental measurements. For this purpose, we focus on ﬁve measurements of diﬀerent multi-jet cross section ratios at the CERN LHC (in pp collisions at and the Fermilab Tevatron Collider (in p¯p collisions at – 4 –  = 7 TeVsCMS 32 a function of hpi in the CMS experiment [4]. Two sets of pQCD predictions, corrected for non-perturbative contributions, are compared to the data: the ﬁxed-order results for R results from the “standard” approach, computed from the ratio of the ﬁxed-order results for the two cross sections. The shaded areas represent the ranges of the scale dependences of the calculations. measurements of the quantities R, R, and R and two-jet production processes. The theoretical predictions for the ratios at NLO are obtained from the LO and NLO pQCD results for the two-jet and three-jet cross section calculations which are computed using nlojet++ [6, 7] with fastNLO [8, 9]. Parametrizations of the parton distribution functions, PDFs, of the proton are taken from the results of the global analysis CT18 [10]. The renormalization, µ, and factorization scales, µ in the experimental publications of the measurement results, either to one of the relevant jet pvariables, or to half of the total jet p results due to the µdependence is computed from independent variations of µ by factors of 0.5–2 around the nominal choices. The corresponding range of variations is referred to as “scale dependence”. Correction factors, to account for non-perturbative contributions are taken from the estimates that were obtained in the experimental analyses. PDF uncertainties are not relevant for the following discussions and have not been evaluated. Computations according to (2.13) are referred to as “ﬁxed-order” results, and those, based on the left equation in (2.6) as the “standard” method. The CMS Collaboration has measured the ratio of the inclusive three-jet cross section and the inclusive two-jet cross section, R |y| < 2.5 [4]. The results are published as a function of the average transverse momentum of the two leading jets in the event, hp displayed in Figure 1. The results of the ﬁxed-order and “standard” calculations for R are compared to the data, with their error bands representing the range of their respective scale dependences. Both results are in agreement, and both describe the data equally well.  (GeV)〉p〈 , measured in pp collisions at√s = 7 TeV as sum, H/2. The uncertainty of the pQCD , for jets with p> 150 GeV and rapidities of i, over the range 0.42 < hpi < 1.39 TeV, as – 5 –   0.1  0.01 as a function of pin the D0 experiment [2]. Two sets of pQCD predictions, corrected for non-perturbative contributions, are compared to the data: the ﬁxed-order results for R results from the “standard” approach, computed from the ratio of the ﬁxed-order results for the two cross sections. The shaded areas represent the ranges of the scale dependences of the calculations. Another measurement of the ratio R with rapidities |y| < 2.4 and for various lower jet p published as a function of the leading jet p for four pchoices from 30 to 90 GeV, as displayed in Figure 2. The pQCD prediction from the “standard” method gives a reasonable description of the data over the whole p range for all prequirements, except for the lowest p ﬁxed-order calculation predicts lower values everywhere and the scale uncertainty bands of the two calculations do either not, or hardly, overlap. Only towards larger p larger p, the uncertainty bands get closer. The D0 Collaboration also published measurement results of a new quantity, R This quantity, while deﬁned in a more inclusive way, also probes the ratio of three-jet and two-jet production. Starting point is an inclusive jet sample (which probes the two-jet production process). The presence of a neighboring jet with ∆R < π is a sign of an event topology with three or more jets. The fraction of all inclusive jets with a neighboring jet, R, is therefore also a three- over two-jet ratio. The quantity R diﬀerent prequirements, p, and diﬀerent angular separations, ∆R, for the neighboring jets, as a function of inclusive jet pfrom 50 to 450 GeV. The results of the ﬁxed-order and the “standard” calculations for Rare compared to the data in Figure 3. In almost all of the phase space the conclusions mirror those for the theoretical description of the CMS Rdata in Figure 1: The ﬁxed-order pQCD predictions agree with those from the “standard” method, and both give a good description of all data with p Only in the softer regime, for p= 30 GeV at smaller p the experimental measurement results. p(GeV) , measured in p¯p collisions at√s = 1.96 TeV was made by the D0 Collaboration for jets – 6 – Figure 3. The multi-jet cross section ratio R the D0 experiment [1], as a function of p, in four values of p sets of pQCD predictions, corrected for non-perturbative contributions, are compared to the data: the ﬁxed-order results for R, and the results from the “standard” approach, computed from the ratio of the ﬁxed-order results for the two cross sections. The shaded areas represent the ranges of the scale dependences of the calculations. The multi-jet ratio Rwas proposed [11] as another ratio of three- and two-jet production processes that probes the azimuthal decorrelations of the two leading p event. The Rmeasurements by the D0 and ATLAS Collaborations [3, 5] both follow the recommendations from the original proposal, and the two results are shown in Figure 4. Both measurements are performed in the same three rapidity regions, y azimuthal decorrelation requirements, ∆φ function of the scalar psum of all jets in an event, H 900 GeV). Since both data sets are measured at diﬀerent center-of-mass energies, results should be compared to each other at the same H between the NLO pQCD predictions from the ﬁxed-order and the “standard” calculations and how they describe the data is pretty much the same for the ATLAS and D0 data sets. In diﬀerent yand ∆φregions, however, the two calculations exhibit a rather diﬀerent behavior. At y< 1.0, for ∆φ= 7π/8 and 5π/6, both calculations agree very well, exhibit a relatively small scale dependence, and both describe the data. At ∆φ the two predictions start to deviate from each other, and in some cases their larger scale uncertainty bands have only a small overlap. The data are described by both predictions. At 1 < y< 2, for ∆φ= 7π/8 and 5π/6, the two predictions have a diﬀerent H dependence and disagree at high H. In these regions, the ﬁxed-order calculation gives a better description of the overall Hshape for both data sets. 50 100   30050 100   300 p(GeV) – 7 – the ATLAS experiment [5] (top) and in p¯p collisions at (bottom), as a function of H, in three regions of y of pQCD predictions, corrected for non-perturbative contributions, are compared to the data: the ﬁxed-order results for R, and the results from the “standard” approach, computed from the ratio of the ﬁxed-order results for the two cross sections. The shaded areas represent the ranges of the scale dependences of the calculations. , measured in pp collisions at√s = 8 TeV in√ – 8 – In the “standard” approach, pQCD predictions for cross section ratios are computed as the ratio of the ﬁxed-order results of the numerator and the denominator. Such a calculation does, however, not represent an exact ﬁxed-order result for the ratio. A method, how to obtain exact ﬁxed-order results for ratios of cross sections is presented in this article. NLO pQCD predictions according to the new ﬁxed-order method and the “standard” method were calculated for ﬁve diﬀerent experimental measurements of multi-jet cross section ratios. For these measured quantities the two predictions were compared to each other and to the experimental data. It was found that in all cases where the results from the two methods agree with each other (as seen for the CMS R of the ATLAS and D0 Rmeasurements in Figures 1, 3, and 4), they also both describe the data. In all cases where the two methods disagree (meaning that their scale uncertainty bands do not overlap, as seen for the D0 R ATLAS and D0 Rdata at y> 1 in Figures 3 and 4), one of them (but not always the same) is describing the data. In some intermediate cases, where the scale uncertainty bands from the two methods have little overlap (as for the ATLAS and D0 R ∆φ= 3π/4 in Figure 4), both predictions are somehow consistent with the data. It is important here to note, that neither of the two methods is fundamentally preferable over the other and both stand exactly on the same footing. In any given order pQCD, the results from both methods are equally valid representation of the perturbative expansion, and they only diﬀer in higher-order terms, just like for the scale dependence of the calculation.Consequently, both results should be taken into account, and their discrepancy should be regarded as a genuine uncertainty, which is not always covered by the range of the scale uncertainties of the individual methods (for example in Figure 4). For future phenomenological studies of cross section ratios, we make the following recommendations: Typically, the goal of phenomenological studies is to ﬁnd if a theory can describe the data. Therefore we recommend to consider both methods, and use the one that gives a better description of the data. In general, this can be decided by a χ (especially in the case of parameter determinations) or sometimes simply by eye (as in Figure 2). Based on the arguments given above, we recommend to use the full envelope of the scale uncertainty bands from both methods as an estimate of the pQCD uncertainty related to uncalculated terms of higher order in α While sometimes the two methods diﬀer only in their normalization (as in Figure 2), in other cases they can also feature very diﬀerent shapes (as in Figure 4). The ﬁrst recomdata and the high Htails in some of the – 9 – mendation ensures that one does not rule out a theory which, in an equally valid alternative form, would actually be able to describe a given data set. The second recommendation acknowledges the additional uncertainty contribution related to the diﬀerence of two equally valid representations of the pQCD calculation which may exceed the uncertainty estimate based on simple scale variations (as seen in Figure 4). This will provide more realistic estimates of theoretical uncertainties and will be helpful in future phenomenological studies when identifying robust measurable quantities for which the theoretical approximations are more reliable. This work is supported by grant 1913877 from the National Science Foundation. L.S. and M.W. also wish to thank the Louisiana Board of Regents Support Fund for the support through the Charles & Nelwyn Spruell and the Eva J. Cunningham Endowed Professorships.