*Corresponding author: emmanuilomd@gmail.com, tel.: +380 (50) 368-63-42, 49000, Volodymyr Monomakh Street, 6, off. 303, Dnipro, Ukraine.  The thermophysical properties of oxide scale, in the general case, are affected by the variation of the temperature of phase transitions (either magnetic or polymorphic) in its components due to impurities, lattice defects, grain sizes, etc. In this case, since the phase transition is usually accompanied by a sharp change in properties, even a small shift of such a critical temperature can lead to large changes in properties in its vicinity. In order to account for this effect, data known from various sources on the true coefficient of linear thermal expansion (CLTE) of wüstite (FeO), magnetite (Fe functions that include critical temperatures as variable parameters. It is shown that the true CLTE of Fe depending on the position of the Curie point within the limits of its possible "movability". The proposed methods allow to take into account the critical temperatures as adaptation parameters in engineering calculations of thermal expansion of oxide scale. Generalized formulas for each scale component are also given in a particular form for fixed (basic) values of critical temperatures. The dependence of the true CLTE of oxide scale as a whole (α proposed. It is shown by model computations that there are temperatures at which α is almost independent of the scale composition (α ≈ 15·10 Kat 650 °С), as well as areas of instability (400-600 °C and above 750 °C), where α the work are recommended to be used when mathematical modeling of production and processing of steel products in the presence of oxide scale on their surface.  Keywords: thermal expansion; wüstite; magnetite; hematite; oxide scale; Curie point  In all high-temperature processes of production and use of steel products, in the presence of oxygen, oxide scale is formed, that, in general, consists of wüstite FeO (more precisely, FeO, where x ≈ 0.05...0.15), magnetite FeO, hematite FeO, metallic iron, oxides of alloying elements and gas voids [1-3]. In many cases this scale has a decisive influence both on the process itself and on the quality of the product. For example, in hot rolling oxide scale affects the friction in the deformation zone, tool wear and the behavior of the metal at the roll exit [4-10]; scale on the rod determines the preparation of its surface before drawing [11-13]; scale significantly affects the intensity of heat transfer in the CCM secondary cooling zone, during thermomechanical control process (TMCP) and quenching [14-19]; oxide scale protects structural alloys against corrosion during liquid-metal cooling [20-21].  Therefore, recently the number of studies related both to the mathematical description of the behavior of oxide scale itself [7; 22-26], and with the modeling of technological processes, taking into account its presence on the surface of products [27-32], has increased sharply. However, as a rule, the thermophysical properties of oxide scale are taken into account by some constants or estimated by particular data obtained under specific conditions, that significantly limits the predictive power of such models. One reason for this situation is that information about the properties of the components of oxide scale are scattered in different references, are often fragmentary and in some cases do not agree with each other. For example, the true linear coefficient of thermal expansion of wüstite at 650 °C according to [33] and [34] differ by a factor of 2.5 (respectively 3.8·10 and 1.5·10 K). Therefore, in engineering calculations, it is advisable to rely on property values obtained not in a specific experiment, but by generalizing the results of various studies. Comprehensive work on the systematization and generalization of the thermophysical properties of various substances was carried out by a team headed by Prof. Y. S. Touloukian in the 1960s and 70s [35]. However, since then, new experimental data on iron oxides have been accumulated and their critical states have been clarified (for example, the magnetic transition of FeO at temperatures around 1050 K (777 ºC), which had been suggested earlier on the basis of [37], was not confirmed [36]). In addition, large differences between the values of properties in different studies can be caused not only by peculiarities of experiments and inevitable heterogeneity of properties of different samples, but  O), hematite (FeO), and metallic iron are generalized by approximating   depends significantly on the percentage of components. The results of also by inconstancy ("movability") of critical temperatures, in the vicinity of which, as a rule, there are sharp changes in material properties. For example, the temperature of the magnetic transition of a crystalline substance may vary due to impurities, lattice defects, particle sizes, etc. [38]. The temperature of polymorphic transformation can vary even more widely, since it also depends on the rate of cooling (heating) [39]. Data on the critical temperatures, at which the peculiarities of changes in the properties of the main components of oxide scale, are summarized in Table 1. Given that even a small shift of the critical temperature can cause large changes in properties, it is advisable to include the critical temperatures in the approximating functions in the form of formal parameters. This will make it possible to use them as adaptation coefficients in mathematical modeling of technological processes and thereby take into account the influence of the movability of critical temperatures. One of the main thermophysical characteristics of a solid matter is the true coefficient of linear thermal expansion (CLTE) which is understood as: where α [K] is the true CLTE, L [m] is the linear size of the body, T [K] is the temperature. It is this parameter that is related to the failure of oxide scale in the processes of deformation and cooling and, accordingly, to the nonuniform conditions on the surface of steel products. The goal of this work is to obtain generalized formulas for calculating the true CLTE of oxide scale in the range from 0 to 1300 ºC, taking into account the movability of critical temperatures in its components.  Research was carried out in three stages: 1) systematization of known data on the thermal expansion for each of the main components of oxide scale at different temperatures; 2) approximation of the systematized data by analytical functions with critical temperatures as formal parameters; 3) convolution of the true CLTE values of individual components into a general formula for scale as a composite material.  Table 1. Values of critical temperatures for components of oxide scale at atmospheric pressure Component Essence of critical temperature Range of variation Wüstite Eutectoid reaction Equilibrium: 833-873 K (560-600 ºС) Magnetite Magnetic transition 823-900 K (550-627 ºС) Hematite Magnetic transition 943-998 K (670-725 ºС) Iron Magnetic transition 1032-1046 K (759-773 ºС)  * The values of critical temperatures that are most common in the technical literature are taken as basic. The formulas in particular form correspond to these basic values (whereas the formulas in general form, also given in the paper, allow taking the different values of critical temperatures in real ranges of their variations).  The most of the data on the thermal expansion for iron oxides are present in the technical literature in the form of the relative elongation of the sample d from the initial length L to the current length L at a given temperature T:  Recalculation of such primary data into the values of the true CLTE α(T) has been performed by the author through preliminary approximation of these data and differentiation of the obtained function, or by the estimated formula: where T and T are tabulated values of temperature in the primary source  (T < T); T = (T+ T)/2;  is the mean CLTE between T and T:   is the same, between T and T:  Two types of phase transitions were taken into account in the second stage of research: polymorphic and magnetic. These types of phase transitions have significant differences due to the fact that during magnetic transitions changes occur only within atoms (electron spins are ordered), but their mutual arrangement in the crystal lattice does not change. Therefore, when choosing approximating functions, the author adopted certain "patterns of behavior" of the true CLTE nearby phase transitions, which are consistent with known empirical data. These “patterns of behavior” assume that at the point of polymorphic transformation the true CLTE experiences a discontinuity (i.e., changes by leaps), while at the point of magnetic transition and at the boundary of thermodynamic stability it changes continuously, but with a possible discontinuity of the first derivative by temperature.  It should be noted that the accepted "patterns of behavior" do not correspond to theoretical provisions: according to the classical theory, the true thermal expansion coefficient should change by a leap at the point of magnetic transition and have an infinite gap at the point of polymorphic transformation [62]. Therefore, these "patterns of behavior" should be considered as reasonable for engineering calculations in conditions of real heterogeneity of composition and structure of materials, as well as blurring of phase transitions in temperature [38; 63]. Taking into account the features of adopted “pattern of behavior” all approximating functions are based on the following general rules: a) Phase transition temperatures are considered as critical temperatures, which divide the entire target temperature range into separate intervals. For wüstite, its thermodynamic stability boundary (Chaudron point) is considered to be the critical temperature that, according to empirical data, can affect thermal expansion. b) Within each temperature interval bounded by critical temperatures, the change in properties is described by a smooth function (which derivative does not undergo a discontinuity). c) At critical temperatures of a magnetic transition or eutectoid reaction (at the Chaudron point for wüstite), the conjugation condition must be satisfied, i.e., the values of the property functions at adjacent intervals must be equal to each other, but the derivatives of these functions can change by leaps (i.e., the property values can change abruptly but continuously). 