A discussion of the adva ntages and disadvanta ges of diﬀerent sets of electroweak input parameters took place in a working-group meeting on review on NLO predictions at the note was presented at t he general working-group meeting on May 3, 2021 and the ﬁnal recommendation discussed on June 28. Adopting a common set of electroweak parameters for tools making SMEFT predictions for LHC observables would ease comparisons and combinations, even though results obtained with one set can in principle be translated to a not her. For the sake of comparison, implementing diﬀerent choices in tools would still be desirable. When performing a SMEFT ﬁt t o a set of observables, the theoretical expression of these observables is given in terms of SM input parameters and Wilson coeﬃcients for the relevant higher-dimensional operators. In principle, the input parameters and Wilson coeﬃcients could be ﬁtted to the data simultaneously, and thus they could be treated on equal footing in the ﬁtting process. However, the practical implementation and performance are improved by extracting input parameters from observables that meet special criteria: 1. The “input observables” are measured very precisely (such that their experimental uncertainty is subdominant or even negligible in a SMEFT ﬁt). 2. The extraction of the input parameters from these observables is (to ﬁrst approxima- 3. When using these input parameters in a SMEFT ﬁt to another set of observables, If these criteria are met, the SM input parameters can be determined independently from the a ctual SMEFT ﬁt, and they can be kept constant during event generation. The input parameters can be divided into two categories: • On-shell masses that are determined from kinematical features (resonance peaks, • Gauge couplings: There is a redundancy in the SM among the parameters α, G three of these should be chosen as input parameters. The three most common choices fo r these three parameters a r e discussed in the following sections. This choice is commonly used in electroweak precision studies, since these three parameters are most precisely known among the set of o bservables considered there. However, m tion) independent of any SMEFT eﬀects, but only depends on eﬀects like QED/QCD corrections, hadronization and backgrounds, that can be evaluated reliably within the SM. they do not introduce any dependence on additional unrelated SMEFT operators. thresholds, kinematic endpoints).New physics eﬀects are negligible if the kinematical features are suﬃciently sharp. a) The electromagnetic coupling α is very precisely determined from very low energy processes [3, 4], where new physics eﬀects decouple and are additionally constrained by QED gauge invariance. For electroweak processes one also needs the running coupling α(m) = α(0)(1−∆α)[5–7], but any new physics eﬀects in ∆α are also constrained by QED gauge invariance. For processes involving external on-shell photons, mixed schemes involving a lso α(0) are advisable (see e.g. sec. 5 of ref. [8]). b) The QCD coupling αcan be determined from many diﬀerent observa bles, but the most precise determinations ar e based on the QCD static potential and lattice QCD (see section on “Quantum Chromodynamics” in [9]), and they are thus protected from new physics by QCD gauge invariance. c) The Fermi constant Gcan be extracted from the muon lifetime [10], which depends on QED corrections and possibly also on new physics at scales Λ > m. must t hen be computed using the relation Here the contributions of dimension-six operators in the HISZ basis [ This implies that the W mass receives SMEFT corrections that, as a consequence, will enter many LHC observables. Since m boundaries, the dependence o n these Wilson coeﬃcients will be highly non- linear, which can be impractical for SMEFT ﬁts. A possible way out is to re-expand the dependence on the Wilson coeﬃcients to linear order. However, even under the assumption that the latter are suﬃciently small to allow expansion, this is diﬃcult to achieve in Monte Carlo programs and may also pose theoretical issues. Presently, the developers of SMEFT tools for LHC predictions tend to favour the {G As it includes bo t h weak gauge bo son masses, it has the advantage of reducing SMEFT dependencies in pro pagators. (Accounting for the SMEFT dependence of the total widths is an issue to be discussed elsewhere.) Mass measurements resting on kinematical features also have clear, model independent, interpretations. However, G a few of these at leading order (with the precise number depending on the basis choice), including the four-fermion operator O pendence on these operators must always be taken into account , even for sets of observables that are entirely unrelated to leptonic physics. As measurements of m need to be recomputed for applications in which small shifts would matter. Using α as input instead of G couplings that arise from operator coeﬃcients aﬀecting the muon decay (such as O It was argued at the December 14 meeting that the α scheme leads to slightly worse electroweak convergences in processes involving g tation value, bot h in the SM and in SMEFT. Using G absorbs m sec. 5 of ref. [ in the two schemes are however very close to each other. Diﬀerences with respect to the c = m/m= 1 − c } set. /mcorrections fr om the ρ parameter into the lower-order result (see e.g. of α and including higher-order contributions to the ρ parameter from the standard model. Irrespective of the electroweak input set they rely on, electroweak and global ﬁts should include the precise measurements of the other parameters as constraints. This means that measurement s of m employ {α, G If m when addressing the combination of LHC and LEP results, as precision calculations of electroweak observables favoured the {α, G precision, these wo uld need to be converted. In fact, this conversion is relatively straightforward since many electroweak precision ﬁtters already use m Conversions b etween schemes that involve both m the coupling dependence is polynomial. It should be not ed that, in principle, the conversion between input schemes concerns two diﬀerent aspects: (i) t he predicted value of a given observable in the SM is modiﬁed. Numerically, this (ii) the dependence on the Wilson coeﬃcients changes. Typically, eﬀects due to from (ii), especially if the observables invo lved are computed with high accuracy in the SM. The conversion us consider the translation fr om the I = {I Predictions for the I observables are ﬁrst obtained in the I separating SM contributions and linearised dimension-six SMEFT corrections. Denoting O+δO and O in the I and I Note that the change in δO due to the shift fr om the original inputs I to I generally expected to be subleading. When it is neglected, only the functional dependence of O Alternatively, one can just re- compute the process of interest using a tool set up with a diﬀerent set of input para meters. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. , m} scheme could be incorporated by resuming contributions from the running is selected as an input quantity for LHC measurements, a potential issue arises scheme dependence decreases as higher-order perturbative corrections are included. on I is required for the translation, and not that of δO. Ultimately, which of t he two is preferable depends o n the process and desired level of approximation. Some aspects to consider are: • The main complication in applying the Jacobian method is that calculating ∂O • The conversion to quadratic order in dimension-six operator coeﬃcients has an extra • The Jacobian method is convenient for estimating the leading dependence on the The conversion dence of the SM prediction on the inputs: For instance in ref. [13, 15] the SM predictions for EWPD were converted from the {α, G in ref. [16] (Eq. (28) a nd Table 5 ) and replacing ∆α by the expression of ∆α(m solving Eqs. (6,7) in ref. [ QCD and QED, the scheme dependence turned out to be numerically very small (< 1‰). In view of the discussion above, the LHC EFT WG recommends that the {G set of electroweak input parameters be presently preferred. As noted earlier, the implementation in simulation too ls of the other two sets discussed here and their comparisons would still be instructive. This recommendation could be re-assessed in the future, notably with the generalization of electroweak SMEFT corrections. requires (semi-)analytic knowledge of the dependence of the SM prediction on the input quantities (at t he perturbative order chosen for the SMEFT calculation). For diﬀerential predictions at the L HC, extracting such a semi-analytical dependence could require a ﬁt of the SM prediction sampled over input parameter values. complication in the Jacobian method, because it would also require knowledge about the dependence on the input parameters of the linear SMEFT contributions, δO. It is also needed to account for the dependence of δO itself on the input scheme. Wilson coeﬃcients that directly modify the input quantities, which are typically only a few. On the other hand, a direct re-calculation is very easy for input schemes that are already implemented in existing tools. , m} to the {G, m, m} scheme employing the semi-analytic formulae provided