is closely linked to the measurement or modelling of weak nuclear reaction rates in hot stellar plasma, whose accurate assessment still represents a bottleneck for nuclear astrophysics. ground-based spectroscopic observations provide precise abundances in Galaxies at diﬀerent redshift and ages. Moreover, new scenarios to unravel heavy-element nucleosynthesis in stars were also opened by the analysis of presolar grains [3, 4] formed in the winds of super- Ba βdecays, which are crucial production channels novae, novae and red giants, and trapped in pristine meteorites. Presolar sturdust oﬀers a view on the isotopic admixture of heavy elements, readily translated into precise constraints to stellar processes [5]. Unfortunately, experiments reproducing astrophysical conditions in ionized plasmas to measure decay rates are still in their infancy [6, 7]. models to account for observations must still rely on simulations, most importantly by calculating nuclear physics inputs of stellar reaction rates with increased accuracy [8]. However, there is a dearth of computational studies of decay processes in astrophysical scenarios from ﬁrstprinciples [9, 10]. One element requiring such studies is barium, which in AGB stars depends solely on slow (s) n-captures. Starting at stableCs, branching points are found, where further n-captures compete with β-decays atCs, such as the Cs(J= 4) −→Ba(J= 4) + e+ ¯ν allowed transition, and atCs, in a delicate balance that must yield production of 100% of s-onlyBa andBa. In particular,Cs →Ba decay (half-life ' 2.0652 y) is characterized by a Q-value (2058.7 keV [11]) large enough to accommodate Cs high-lying nuclear excited states (e.g. 5at 11.2442 keV and 3at 60 keV above the ground state (GS)). The emergence ofCs short-lived nuclear excited states, possibly populated at high temperature, and the decay toBa isomers (such as 4, 3) may dramatically aﬀect this transition owing to their diﬀerent forbiddance. Furthermore, despite these transitions are essentially quark-level processes, they strongly depend also on extra-nuclear factors, such as temperature and electron density, signiﬁcantly varying in the layers of evolved stars outside the degenerate core. Indeed, these parameters may aﬀect the ionization degree of the atomic systems where the decay occurs, which in turn modiﬁes the discrete-to-continuum transition ratio [9, 10, 12]. Along the path of the s-process through Cs and Ba isotopes, the n-capture onCs feeds the longer-livedCs, which eventually β decays toBa via a 2forbidden unique transition Cs(7/2) → Ba(3/2), whose half-life is 2.3×10y with a GS-GS Q-value of 268.7 keV [13]). The inclusion of several nuclear excited states of the parentCs nucleus (notably the 5/2states at 249.767 and 408.026 keV above the GS, respectively), as well as the population of electronic excited levels, may aﬀect signiﬁcantly also this total rate at high temperature. In this work, we develop a fully relativistic quantum mechanical framework to compute the temperature and density dependence of the β decay half-life of theCs andCs isotopes, by considering both the electronic and nuclear excited state population dynamics. We show that the inclusion of these degrees of freedom (DOF) acts concurrently to lower the relevant Cs isotopes half-lives, even by several orders of magnitude, with respect to laboratory conditions. In order to determine the weak decay rates, we use a mean-ﬁeld approximation to the internuclear and interelectronic interactions, which proves accurate in reproducing the terrestrial observables [14]. Our suggestions strongly aﬀect previous s-process predictions on Cs and Ba isotopes using β-decay half-lives by [1, 2]. In this respect, we apply our new rates to revise recent models aiming to explain the peculiar ratios of Ba isotopes in presolar SiC grains [5], ﬁnding remarkable reconciliation of theory and observations. In the traditional approach, β decay spectra of allowed and forbidden transitions are calculated by using an analytical expression of the rate [15] where several factors appear, which account for the nuclear and phase-space structure, and for the atomic exchange. At variance, our approach is based on the ﬁrst-principle calculation of the total QED Hamiltonian of the system, written as a sum of the internuclear interaction, of the interelectronic repulsive force, and of the weak decay. For a detailed discussion on our method we refer to Supplemental Material (SM), here we sketch the pivotal points. Within our framework, the evaluation of the transition operator is factorized into the product of leptonic and hadronic currents [14]. We also require that the latter term is separable into neutron and proton ﬁeld operators, which means essentially that the decaying neutron acts as a particle uncorrelated to the core of the remaining nucleons. Such core, which couples only geometrically so as to recover the experimental total angular momentum of the parent reactant is approximated by a linear combination of angular momentum wavefunctions. However, this is not a limiting factor: for our method is systematically improvable by using more sophisticated manybody methods [16]. Furthermore, one can safely assume that the leptonic current can be written as a product of the neutrino and electron quantum ﬁeld operators. The hadronic and leptonic currents are both reckoned by the self-consistent numerical solution of the Dirac-HartreeFock equation (DHF) within a mean-ﬁeld approximation. In this work, protons and neutrons are interacting via a semi-empirical relativistic Wood-Saxon (WS) potential, while the electron-electron Coulomb repulsion is modelled via a local density approximation (LDA) to the electron gas (V∝ ρ(r)) [17, 18]. Electrons, in particular, populate the energy levels according to a Fermi-Dirac distribution, where the chemical potential is assessed by assuming that they behave as an ideal Fermi gas in a box with a relativistic energy-momentum dispersion at all temperatures. The non-orthogonality between the bound initial and ﬁnal orbitals, and the possible presence of shake-up and shake-oﬀ are also taken into account in the calculation of the continuum electron wavefunction. At very high temperature, we included positron formation, enforcing the overall neutrality of the plasma at all proton densities to model diﬀerent astrophysical scenarios (see Table Figure 1. Half-life ofCs (a) and ofCs (b) vs. temperature (violet line) from our DHF calculations for n including the (a) 4, 5, 3Cs and (b) 5/2, 5/2 half-life is computed with the electrons clamped in their GS. Orange and yellow lines report the maximum (centroid+σ) and minimum (centroid-σ) values obtained using the log(ft) of the general systematics, while in the blue line (Cs systematics) we used the centroid of the speciﬁcCs systematics (which do not exist for TY [1, 2]. In panel a) we also show (red line) the half-life for a completely ionized decay half-life (black line, GS-only). The trend is the same for our ab-initio β decay rates (AI) and those by TY [1, 2] for n according to our model, including both nuclear and electronic DOFs, as a function of temperature and proton density. S1 of the SM reporting electron vs. proton densities). ∆J = 0) transition, the lepton ﬁeld carries no orbital angular momentum and the rate has been assessed under the assumption, derived by using the nuclear shell model, that the decaying neutron within the parentCs nucleus occupies the 2dshell, while the generated proton populates the 1gorbital ofBa. In our calculations we included the 4GS and the two lowest energy nuclear Cs nuclear states as well as the electronic DOF. In cyan (DHF-eGS) Cs (not shown). Insets of a) and b) give the ratios between = 10cm. Panels c) and d) displayCs andCs half-lives states (5, 3, respectively) ofCs, occupied according to a Boltzmann distribution f(E) = we, where Eis the energy of the i-th nuclear level, weighted by the relevant level degeneration factor (w= 9, 11, 7, respectively). Our rate has been renormalized at all temperatures by a constant factor, obtained so as to recover the experimental log(ft) at Earth conditions. This renormalization factor is needed essentially to correct the hadronic current, which may suﬀer from the WS mean-ﬁeld evalu- Table I. Comparison betweenCs rates obtained using our model and by TY [2] (units in s× 10). TTYThis work ation of the nucleon wavefunctions. The electronic DOF is also taken into account. In Fig. 1a) we compare our results (violet line) with the data set obtained by Takahashi and Yokoi (TY) (green line) [1, 2]. Values obtained with our model compared to TY’s results are reported in Table I and in the inset of Fig. 1a); a ﬁner grid of points can be found in Tab. S2 of SM. We stress that in TY’s study the eﬀect of the excited nuclear dynamics on the β decay rates was estimated via the log(ft) values for general β transitions of given forbiddance, typically derived from systematics, as experimental measurements are still unattainable in astrophysical conditions [6, 7]. At odds with our calculations, neither TY include in their estimate the electronic DOF, nor they calculate the nuclear matrix elements from ﬁrst-principles. We observe that the inclusion of the nuclear excited state dynamics represents the most relevant eﬀect on the Cs β decay rate and is crucial at high temperatures (> 10 keV), where nuclear states are most likely populated. Indeed, the presence of fast-decaying nuclear excited states can increase the rate by a factor of 15 at 100 keV (1 GK) and up to 23 at 1000 keV, with respect to room temperature conditions. In particular, there the half-life decrease can be almost entirely attributed to the 3nuclear excited state, which implies a rate ' 80 times higher than the 4nuclear GS (if they were at each time the only occupied nuclear states to decay), while GS-only decay increases with temperature (black line in Fig. 1a). We also notice that temperature has a relevant eﬀect on the lepton DOF in the range [0-10] keV (see the diﬀerence between the half-live including both DOF (violet line) and with electrons clamped in their GS (cyan line)). In the limit case of a bare nucleus (red curve in Fig. 1a), where all Cs electrons are stripped out (Cs 1s binding energy is ' 36 keV), the half-life is consistently lower (by 20% in laboratory conditions) than the one of the neutral atom, as the emitted β-electron can land in any bound orbital. Finally, we stress that our half-lives diﬀer from those obtained by using the centroid of the log ft general systematics, which include all β transitions of all the elements for a given forbiddance. In Fig. 1a) we report the reference band ofCs half-life using the standard deviation (centroid ±σ, yellow and orange lines, respectively) of such systematics. We notice that TY’s recommendations are however out of this range. Our results (cyan line), at variance, are in better agreement with the speciﬁc systematics ofCs (blue line), where the electronic DOF are of course neglected. Finally, in Fig. 1c) we plot theCs half-life vs. the proton density and temperature varying in the interior of stars. We notice that, at temperatures > 10 keV, the half-life shows a signiﬁcant drop, also at very high density, owing to the decay from theCs nuclear excited states. Cs β decay. The results obtained with our model are compared with those by TY in Table II (a ﬁner grid can be found in Table S3 of SM and in the inset of Fig. 1b). In Fig. 1b) we also plot the half-life vs. temperature obtained by our DHF model (violet line) with the previous estimate by TY (green line). In this case, both data are found within the range spanned by the general systematics for these transitions (orange and yellow lines showing the maximum and minimum of log(ft)). Again, in cyan we plot the half-life obtained by clamping the electrons in their GS, to determine the electronic contribution to the β transition with increasing temperature. The latter is neglected in TY, while the inclusion of this DOF almost halves the half-life around 10 keV. In Fig. 1d) we plot the half-life vs. temperature and proton density, ﬁnding similar, but steeper descent with increasing temperature with respect toCs. Our results immediately touch recent suggestions [20], according to which a more accurate treatment of β decays in hot plasmas is needed for improving the modelling of Ba isotopes in AGB stars. This is especially true for the composition of presolar SiC grains [5]. Postponing a thorough discussion to a future work, we shall therefore use our rates to revise calculations on that issue [5]. In Fig. 2 (left panel) we present the results obtained by using cross sections from the Kadonis 1.0 repository [19] and decay rates from TY [5]. The right panel shows the changes obtained exclusively by adopting the βdecay rates of this work. We stress that the new model curves, reproducing the expectations of AGB stars characterized (indicated by the symbol δ), as computed in recent AGB models by [5]. Model curves from stellar masses and metallicities as indicated are from the standard case discussed there, with cross sections from [19] and decay rates from TY. Right panel: the results of the same models, where only the decay rates for work. by masses and metallicities as indicated, improve remarkably the agreement with laboratory measurements (gray dots) and ﬁt well the main area occupied by the data. We notice that the novel rates presented here improve even on a tentative guess reported in [5] (see Figure 19(a) therein). A further implication of our half-life revision concerning the solar distribution of s-elements is reported in SM. Cs andCs have been changed, using the ones of the present topes is dramatically increased by two concurrent factors: the inclusion of nuclear and electronic excited states of parent and daughter nuclei, up to complete ionization. Most notably we ﬁnd i) that the highest energy nuclear excited state ofCs at 60 keV, while scarcely populated, is the fastest to β decay, with a rate ' 80 times higher than the GS-to-GS one; ii) a general increase of the rate with respect to the GS decay only; it is close to a factor of ' 3 at 20 keV, ' 6 at 30 keV, ' 8 at 40 keV, which are the typical energies characterizing thermal pulses in AGB stars. ForCs, where similar concurrent eﬀects of nuclear and electronic DOF in lowering the half-life upon population were found, our results are within the standard deviation of the general systematics. Finally, we stress that the application of our ﬁndings to s-process computations in AGB stars permits a remarkably improved agreement between models and observations, especially for the presolar SiC grain isotopic composition. Correspondence email address: taioli@ectstar.eu Correspondence email: stefano.simonucci@unicam.it [1] K. Takahashi and K. Yokoi, Nuclear Physics A 404, 578 (1983). [2] K. Takahashi and K. Yokoi, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 36, 375 (1987). [3] E. Zinner, in Treatise on Geochemistry (Second Edition), edited by H. D. Holland and K. K. Turekian (Elsevier, Oxford, 2014) second edition ed., pp. 181 – 213. [4] N. Liu, T. Stephan, P. Boehnke, L. R. Nittler, B. S. Meyer, C. M. O. Alexander, J. Wang, R. Trappitsch, M. J. Pellin, and A. M. Davis, in 80th Annual Meeting of the Meteoritical Society, Vol. 80 (2017) p. 6283. [5] S. Palmerini, M. Busso, D. Vescovi, E. Naselli, A. Pidatella, R. Mucciola, S. Cristallo, D. Mascali, A. Mengoni, S. Simonucci, and S. Taioli, in press (2021), arXiv:2107.12037 [astro-ph.SR]. [6] D. Mascali, A. Musumarra, F. Leone, F. P. Romano, A. Galatà, S. Gammino, and C. Massimi, The European Physical Journal A 53, 145 (2017). [7] D. Mascali et al., EPJ Web Conf. 227, 01013 (2020). [8] K. Nomoto, C. Kobayashi, and N. Tominaga, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 51, 457 (2013). [9] S. Simonucci, S. Taioli, S. Palmerini, and M. Busso, The Astrophysical Journal 764, 118 (2013). [10] D. Vescovi, L. Piersanti, S. Cristallo, M. Busso, F. Vissani, S. Palmerini, S. Simonucci, and S. Taioli, Astronomy & Astrophysics 623, 7 (2019). [11] A. Sonzogni, Nuclear Data Sheets 103, 1 (2004). [12] S. Palmerini, M. Busso, S. Simonucci, and S. Taioli, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 665, 012014 (2016). [13] B. Singh, A. A. Rodionov, and Y. L. Khazov, Nuclear Data Sheets 109, 517 (2008). [14] T. Morresi, S. Taioli, and S. Simonucci, Advanced Theory and Simulations 1, 1870030 (2018). [15] L. Hayen, N. Severijns, K. Bodek, D. Rozpedzik, and X. Mougeot, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015008 (2018). Kolck, eds., An advanced course in computational nuclear physics: Bridging the scales from quarks to neutron stars, Lecture notes in physics, Vol. 936 (Springer, Cham, 2017) p. 644 pages. [17] J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev. 81, 385 (1951). [18] F. Salvat, J. D. Martìnez, R. Mayol, and J. Parellada, Phys. Rev. A 36, 467 (1987). [19] I. Dillmann, T. Szücs, R. Plag, Z. Fülöp, F. Käppeler, A. Mengoni, and T. Rauscher, Nuclear Data Sheets 120, 171 (2014), arXiv:1408.3688 [astro-ph.SR]. [20] M. Busso, D. Vescovi, S. Palmerini, S. Cristallo, and V. Antonuccio-Delogu, Astrophys. J. 908, 55 (2021). arXiv:0709.3525 [nucl-th] (2007). [22] M. R. Harston and N. C. Pyper, Phys. Rev. A 45, 6282 (1992). [23] N. Prantzos, C. Abia, S. Cristallo, M. Limongi, and A. Chieﬃ, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 491, 1832 (2020). scenarios. In the traditional approach, β decay spectra of allowed and forbidden transitions are calculated by using an analytical expression of the rate [15] where several factors appear, which account for the nuclear and phase-space structure, and for the atomic exchange. where Hcontains the interactions between nucleons in the initial and ﬁnal nuclear states, H electron Coulomb correlation, taking into account that the transition occurs inside a partially ionized atom, and ﬁnally His the zero-order QED weak interaction, which fulﬁlls the Lorentz-invariance: where G= 1.16637 × 10GeV, Lis the lepton current: and His the hadronic current: In Eqs. (3,4) γ, µ = 0, ..., 4 are the Dirac matrices, and u annihilation operators, respectively. statistical mixture of initial states ˆρ= p|i >< i| to a mixture of ﬁnal states P In the typical approximation to the general theory of β decay, where the recoil energy of the ﬁnal nucleus is small with respect to the nucleon rest mass, the initial and ﬁnal states can be written as: where |hi are initial and ﬁnal multi-nucleon states characterized by the quantum numbers |J where J, Mdenote the total angular momentum and its projection along some ﬁxed axis of the initial and ﬁnal states, respectively, and Tis the isospin; |e wheren···nrepresent the bound orbitals; ﬁnally, |¯ν by a free plane wave). We point out that the initial and ﬁnal multi-nucleon states and the initial multi-electron states are characterized by a discrete spectrum, while the ﬁnal multi-electron state, which describes the β emission, is a continuum state that can be written as a linear combination of external products |e |η> describes the β-electron continuum wavefunction and I hadronic currents [14]. This is ultimately due to the large rest mass of the W vector boson that mediates the weak |ii = |hi ⊗ |e i ⊗ |ei ⊗ |¯ν i = |j, m;n···niis the initial many-electron state, interaction. Furthermore, we can safely assume that electrons and neutrinos are not coupled and thus the lepton current (3) can be further factorized in the independent product of the neutrino and electron quantum ﬁeld operators (or, dealing with expectation values, wavefunctions). In this work, we also make the assumption that the hadronic current can be factorized in the product of neutron and proton ﬁeld operators. The hadronic current separability is basically equivalent to require that only one nucleon within the parent nucleus participates into the decay dynamics. The decaying nucleon is thus an independent particle, uncorrelated to the “core” of the remaining nucleons. Such a core, which couples only geometrically to the decaying nucleon so as to recover the total angular momentum of the parent reactant and of the ﬁnal daughter nucleus, is approximated by a linear combination of angular momentum wavefunctions. Our approximation assumes the validity of the nuclear shell model. However, this does not represent an intrinsic limit of our method, as the hadronic current for systems where many-body eﬀects are expected to play a paramount role can be assessed separately, via more accurate ﬁrst-principle approaches [16]. The hadronic current (4) is derived by an explicit numerical solution of the Dirac equation (DE) in a central potential. In our solution, protons and neutrons interact via a semi-empirical scalar and vector relativistic Wood-Saxon (WS) spherical symmetric potential, which describes the nucleon-nucleon interaction [21], whereby the DE is mono-dimensional in the radial variable. To solve the equation, a grid with a few thousands points is used [14]. Also the electron wavefunctions are found by solving self-consistently the Dirac-Hartree-Fock (DHF) equation in a central potential. Electrons interact via a mean-ﬁeld, where the non-local exchange (Fock term) is replaced by the local density approximation (LDA) to the electron gas (V equation was found by using a modiﬁed Runge-Kutta method [14]. The non-orthogonality between the bound initial nand ﬁnal norbitals, which are obtained by solving the DHF equations for the parent and daughter nuclei carrying a diﬀerent atomic number is taken into account. The continuum β-electron wavefunction ψ the ﬁeld produced by both the nucleus and the surrounding electrons as a Slater determinant, to take into account the atomic exchange. The β-electron continuum wavefunction within this framework thus reﬂects the fact that the emitted lepton may decay into a bound state of the daughter nucleus with ejection of a secondary bound electron and that ﬁnal state excitations, such as shake-up and shake-oﬀ [14], can be present. Atomic exchange eﬀects open up multiple decay channels that typically increase the β decay rate particularly at low energies [22], where the overlap between the continuum and discrete wave functions maximizes. Electrons populate the energy levels according to a Fermi-Dirac (FD) distribution n F (T, µ), where Kis the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. The eigenvalues  self-consistent solution of the DHF equation for the leptons, and the chemical potential is assessed by assuming that the electrons behave as an ideal Fermi gas in a box with a relativistic energy-momentum dispersion E Table S1. n/nand (n− n)/nratios of proton densities n densities nas a function of temperatures T (keV). as n=dp p/π×(F ((c ×(p+ mc) −µ)/K electron orbitals of Cs and Ba have not been re-optimized at each temperature. At very high temperature, however, we included positron formation in our model. The plasma at a given temperature is assumed overall neutral, that is n= n− n, where n, n, nare the proton, electron, and positron density, respectively. Note that n at high densities, while they can diﬀer sensibly a low densities. Protons are treated as nonrelativistic particles and their density has been varied in the range n= 10−10 report the proton vs. relevant electron densities at diﬀerent temperatures. T ) −F ((c ×(p+ mc) + µ)/KT )). We notice that the to model diﬀerent astrophysical scenarios. In Table S1 we Table S3.Cs half-lives (years) obtained by our model for several densities (cm in Refs. [5, 20]. In particular, very recently rather extensive analyses of neutron captures in AGB stars pointed out how a reappraisal of the rates here presented for β temperature and density, was crucial for any improvement in our understanding of the isotopic admixture of Ba in the Sun [20]. In particular, it was shown that (see Fig. 4 in [20]) an average model could be identiﬁed, suitable to mimic (if properly normalized) the outcomes of a simulation from a chemical evolution model of the Galaxy at least for the s-process contribution to heavy nuclei. In those estimates, (as they do not receive contributions from other processes). In Fig. S1 we show the results of the calculations carried out using the same physical models and nuclear parameters as in Ref. [20], only updating the two rates discussed here. With blue dots we show the original results for s-only nuclei sited close to the magic neutron number N = 82. In red we report the new values found forBa and We stress that the improvement over the previous expectations is striking. We notice that similar improvements are also expected for Galactic Chemical Evolution models computed with full stellar evolutionary yields [23], which were showed to have severe problems withBa andBa. Figure S1. Percentage of s-process contributions (blue dots) as computed by [20], for s-only nuclei near the magic neutron number N = 82. In a perfect model, without nuclear or stellar uncertainties, all points should be aligned at zero. Red points (marked by arrows) show the results forBa andBa in a revised calculation where, all the rest remaining the same, we adopted the β-decay rates forCs andCs computed in the present work. We note that two more nuclei look as outliers in the ﬁgure. They areNd andSm, whose abundances are critically linked to the decay rates of for which a revision like the present one would be needed. decays, with a more accurate treatment of their dependence on Ba using our new rates (all the rest remaining untouched).