<title>INFORMATION SOURCES AND ANXIETY AMONG REFUGEES IN  KENYA DURING COVID-19</title> In the COVID-19 pandemic, refugees’ access to information has become increasingly  Abstract:   important given the rapid change in the scientific and public health knowledge-base.   However,  this  access  is  complicated  by  social  distancing  requirements  that  disrupt  traditional  in-person  communication.    Many  refugees  must  then  rely  on  alternative  information  sources  to  stay  informed.  Differences  in  media  types  and  information  sources in turn may be related to anxieties arising from the virus and perceptions of  others’  adherence  to  recommended  protective  behaviors.  We  examine  these  relationships with survey data from 1,000 refugees living in both camps and non-camp  settings in Kenya. Using logit models, we test relationships between information source  and  anxiety  and  the  effect  of  these  variables  on  refugees’  expected  behaviors  of  community members.  Our primary contributions include the finding that information  sources  consistently  exacerbate  (e.g.,  Facebook)  or  ameliorate  (e.g.,  news  from  the  internet) different anxieties, or can have mixed effects (e.g., radio). We also find that  anxiety  and  information  have  significant  impacts  on  refugees’  expectations  of  compliance by others and that, whether between camps or between camps and non-camp  locales, findings vary by location. Our results have implications for refugee media and  infectious  disease  anxiety  scholarship  as  well  as  for  managing  infectious  disease  response.  Refugees, COVID-19, Information, Anxiety, Social Perception  Keywords:  <title>1. INTRODUCTION</title> The COVID-19 pandemic has affected people across the globe, including refugees.  It has disrupted  traditional  inter-personal  communication  channels,  making  information  on  COVID-19  more  difficult  to  obtain.  This  lack  of  information  may  exacerbate  refugees’  pre-existing  anxieties.  However,  a  variety  of  media,  from  national  and  local  radio,  to  mobile-phone-based  sources  (SMS/WhatsApp) may fill the gap, and help assuage pandemic fears.  In general, it has been found  that during pandemics, people’s adherence to recommended behaviors is influenced by individual  factors, such as  self-efficacy, and  social factors  (Farooq et al.,  2020), including  perceptions of  others’ adherence (Desclaux et al., 2017).  In turn, media and information sources may influence  these perceptions (Allington et al., 2020).  These media sources may play an even greater role in  refugee camps where access to information is more limited due to their typically rural locations and  smaller personal networks.   We investigate these relationships among refugee populations, which  may have locationally determined media and information sources.  To  study  these  relationships,  we  analyze  the  COVID-19  related  information  sources,  anxiety  sources, and perceptions of other’s adherence to virus mitigation strategies reflected in data from  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees’  (UNHCR)  Kenya  COVID-19  Rapid  Response Survey. The data set includes 16 information sources and 10 distinct sources of Covid-19  anxiety.  We  analyze  relationships  between  information  sources  and  anxiety  through  logistic  regression models for specific locales.  Next, using logistic regression, we examine the combined  impact of information sources and anxiety on perceptions of others’ compliance with recommended  behaviors.   The paper is structured as follows. First is the review of the literature on refugees and infectious  disease outbreaks, including their media and information environments, disease-related anxiety, and  the behavioral intentions and social  perceptions  related to  recommended behaviors.   Second is  background information on the media and information environment in Kenya as well as a descriptive  analysis of the dataset.  This is followed by presentation of the findings. Finally, is a discussion of  the implications of this study.    <title>2. LITERATURE REVIEW</title> In the following sections we present the aforementioned three-part literature review. Along with  describing how media, anxiety, and expectations of others play a role in the normal lives of refugees,  we analyze how they may differ under pandemic settings and consider the interactive relationships  between them.  Two established media theories, the knowledge gap and media repertoires, inform our analysis of  the media environment of refugees. The knowledge gap theory provides the rationale for media use  in  accessing  Covid-19  information,  while  media  repertories  emphasizes  the  multi-media  environment of refugees.  In the past, the knowledge gap theory has been used to describe the  inequality in information acquisition from mass media due to socioeconomic factors (Tichenor,  Donohue, & Olien, 1970).    However, research on information  attainment related to infectious  diseases suggests more nuanced analyses are required (Ho, 2012; Bekalu and Eggermont, 2014).   Ho (2012)  found  that  the knowledge  gap  hypothesis  was not  supported  in  her study of  public  knowledge  of  the  H1N1  flu  pandemic  in  Singapore.    However,  differences were  found  in  the  knowledge gap size within her sample based on the type of media used.  Bekalu and Eggermont  (2014) show that mass media usage widens the regional gap of HIV/AIDS knowledge between urban  and rural communities in northwestern Ethiopia. This importance of location in infectious disease  knowledge was  corroborated  by Agegnehu  and  Tesema (2020)  in  their  study of  HIV/AIDS in  Ethiopia.  The results from these studies show that, while socioeconomic status and media usage are  not predictive of infectious disease knowledge, gaps in knowledge of infectious diseases tend to  have other underlying influences, like community location and media type.     The  media  repertoires  framework  recognizes  diverse  media  use  behaviors  and  underpins  our  analysis of the relationships between media. Kim (2016), in a study of Korean media use, identified  five different media repertoires (e.g., news on traditional media, internet only) and explains these  differences with both individual and structural factors. Similarly, Jang and Park (2016) examine  complementarity and substitutability between media. Their analysis of Korean users and the role of  devices  investigates  substitutability  between  paper  and  computers  in  consuming  news,  and  computers and telephones in consuming informative content. Peters and Schroder (2018) combine  media repertoires with news repertories, integrating a socio-spatial component. However, the spatial  component is on a micro-scale, referring to local situations of media use, such as within a household  or on a bus.   Spatial elements are important in the context of refugee communities, as many reside in camps or  urban centers.  These dense collections of individuals can increase the likelihood of heterogeneity  in media sources.  Both within camps and between camp-based and urban refugees, differences in  wealth, education, literacy, and multilingualism can all affect access to Covid-19 information. As  noted by Kumpel (2020), simple heterogeneity in interest levels can affect people’s access to news,  particularly via social media networks where algorithms use past behaviors to serve up personalized  content.  This heterogeneity in demographic factors can lead to differences between groups in the  usage of media to gain information on and cope with anxiety caused by COVID-19 (Pahayahay and  Khalili-Mahani, 2020).  The stresses of forced displacement prior to, during, and post-migration contribute heavily to an  increased risk of anxiety among refugees (Hameed et al., 2018).  For example, Karenni refugees  residing along the Burmese-Thai border see anxiety rates as high as 42% (Vonnahme et al., 2015).   Hameed et al. write in their 2018 review article that this increased prevalence of anxiety is due to  trauma from violence and political oppression, the resulting lack of basic necessities, and lasting  concerns of safety and uncertainty for the future.  Infectious diseases like COVID-19 can exacerbate anxieties by triggering pre-existing traumas,  hindering the flow of information, and furthering social isolation. The natural concerns that many  people have surrounding illness and death are compounded for refugees, who are in many cases are  limited in their ability to check on the health of their friends and family in their home countries  (Rees and Fisher, 2020).  Anxieties surrounding one’s health during an infectious disease outbreak  are  made  worse  in  refugee  camps  where  medicine  and  healthcare  are  already  strained  due  to  overcrowding, poor hygiene, and lack of resources (Hermans et al., 2017).  Further, the necessary  diversion  of  health  resources  towards  fighting  an  infectious  disease  can  then  limit  access  to  healthcare services for refugees with preexisting mental illnesses (El-Khatib et al., 2020).  An additional source of  anxiety for refugees during infectious disease outbreaks is  the lack of  information  due  to  communication  barriers  (Bukuluki  et  al.,  2020).    Many  refugees  face  communications barriers due to language differences between their home and hosting countries.   This  barrier  can  prevent  them  from  receiving  public  health  and  educational  messages  from  governmental sources.  Language barriers can also expose refugees to public health misinformation  from their peers and informal social networks (Bukuluki et al., 2020).  This stress-inducing lack of  information and confusing misinformation serve as additional sources of anxiety.    COVID-19 has contributed to refugees’ anxiety through social distancing policies, which have the  potential  to  exacerbate  the  already  common  social  isolation  of  refugees.    Social  support  and  connectedness are important for refugee recovery following trauma, but their inability to make new  connections due to social distancing inhibits this (Rees and Fisher, 2020).  A lack of social support  and  connectedness,  along  with  financial  hardships  due  to  social  distancing,  can  contribute  to  increased feelings of loneliness and anxiety (El-Khatib et al., 2020).  The isolation effects of social  distancing may be even more exaggerated for refugees, who tend to be seen as transmitters of the  virus due to their migratory status (Bukuluki et al., 2020).    Quarantining  policies  can  be  especially  traumatic  for  refugees  as  well,  some  of  whom  have  previously experienced forced detainment and restricted freedom of movement (Rees and Fisher,  2020).  Properly explained reasoning for the importance of quarantining could alleviate this anxiety,  but the aforementioned communication barriers do not always make this possible.  This same issue  often results in a fear of the uncertainty related to quarantining policies (El-Khatib et al., 2020).  In  some situations, stringent movement restrictions can even prevent refugees from accessing resources  like communal sources of water (Bukuluki et al., 2020).  Disruptions to refugees’ rights and daily  routines like these act as additional sources of anxiety.  Adherence to quarantining and other social distancing policies is influenced in part by social and  cultural norms (Webster et al., 2020).  During the 2003 SARS outbreak in Toronto, individuals  reported that they felt social pressures to adhere to quarantining (Cava et al., 2005). These pressures  are dual sided, though, in that when it is known that some individuals have broken quarantine, others  are more likely to break protocols as well (Braunack-Mayer et al, 2013). Desclaux et al. (2017) find  that cultural pressures to quarantine during the 2014-2016 West Africa Ebola epidemic existed on  both the household and the community level.  They write that study participants recognized the  collective  commitment  to  protecting  their  community,  and  that  failure  to  comply  was  seen  as  disrespectful.  Along  with  social  perceptions,  one  of  the  greatest  motivating  factors  for  adherence  to  virusmitigating behavioral changes is fear of the virus.  In their international sample on COVID-19  behavioral changes, Harper et al. (2020) found that fear of the virus and anxiety related to it were  predictors of health-compliant behavioral changes.  Other factors like moral or political orientation  were not nearly as significant in determining behavioral intentions.  Clark et al. (2020) saw similar  results in their international study on COVID-19 compliance behaviors.  They found that those who  wanted to prioritize their own health and believed that behavioral changes would have an effect  were the most likely to comply.    Media was also found to influence health-protective behavioral intentions.  Specifically, Allington  et al. (2020) saw that COVID-19 conspiracy theories resulting from misinformation on social media  were a contributing factor to non-compliance with health-protective behaviors.  On the other hand,  usage of traditional forms of broadcast media had a positive relationship with health-protective  behaviors.  The authors posit that the reason for these trends observed in their UK sample is that  broadcast media is regulated, whereas social media is not.    The above discussion highlights the role of location and media type on infectious disease knowledge  of refugees, as well as the types and combinations of media use. It also examines refugee anxiety  and  the  exacerbating  role  of  the  pandemic.  Of  note  are  the  informational  aspects,  such  as  the  relationship between anxiety and lack of information, as well as the effect of social distancing on  information. Finally, the literature review highlights the role of fear of the virus, a form of anxiety,  as well as media, on intentions to comply with behavioral recommendations.   While these findings suggest a relationship between information sources, anxiety, and Covid-19  expectations  of  compliance,  comprehensive  quantitative  evidence  is  lacking.  Specifically,  the  relationship between information sources and particular sources of Covid-19 anxiety require further  investigation. Similarly, while logically media and fear of the virus are likely to impact expectations  of others’ compliance, little evidence of this relationship among refugees exists. In the following,  we examine these associations, specifically investigating:   RQ1: How are refugees’ information sources and specific Covid-19 anxieties related? What role  does location play?   RQ2: How are refugees’ information sources and specific Covid-19 anxieties related to expectations  of others’ compliance to recommended behaviors? What role does location play?  <title>3. BACKGROUND AND METHODS</title> Kenya’s media environment is highly-competitive, with one of the most vibrant and well-produced  media in the African continent (BBC, 2019).  With a literacy rate of 82% (World Bank, 2018),  Kenyans consume a wide array of media in English, Kiswahili, and local languages. Currently,  Kenya has six dailies, regional publications and various kinds of magazines. While newspapers are  mainly concentrated in urban areas, they have a pass along rate of 10-14, greatly increasing their  reach (Obuya and Ong’ondo, 2019).  Furthermore, digital editions also extend the reach. This is  alongside more than seventy television stations and over 160 radio stations according to the Media  Council of Kenya website.   Kenya’s  Internet  penetration  is  one  of  the  highest  in  Africa  at  87.2%  (Internet  World  Stats),  occurring primarily through mobile phones (83%) (Namunwa, 2019).  However, due to high data  costs only 13 million of the 43.3 million Kenyans with access to a phone are active users.    Unsurprisingly,  radio  remains  the  most  popular  medium,  followed  by  television.    Media  concentration and cross-ownership is an area of concern with 5 privately owned media networks  dominating  media  ownership  in  the  country  (Obuya  and  Ong’ondo,  2019).    However,  the  government-owned media, Kenya Broadcasting Corporation has extensive reach across the country  and runs several radio stations and a couple of television outlets.  To study how  the consumption  of COVID-19  information  from  these  sources  impacts  refugee  anxiety and social perceptions, we utilize public survey data from the World Bank.  We first provide  descriptive statistics of COVID-19 information sources, anxieties, and social perceptions of others  among refugees on a regional level for contextual understanding.  After conducting ANOVA and  Tukey tests for differences in means among social perceptions, we construct a series of logit models  in an attempt to explain why.  We first test whether individuals’ COVID-19 information sources are  predictors for their related anxieties and then for whether their information sources and anxieties  predict their perceptions of others adherence to protective guidelines.  We chose to use logistic  regression models for these tests because of the binary nature of our survey data and the utility of  testing significance of both the overall model and the individual predictors as well as the availability  of metrics on model fit.   Our data comes from a publicly available survey by the World Bank, together with Kenyan National  Bureau of Statistics, UNHCR, and the University of California, Berkeley, from May to August of  2020.  The group conducted a high frequency phone survey in Kenya to monitor the socioeconomic  impact of COVID-19 on households throughout the country. Survey participants came from three  different sources: randomly drawn from a subset of the 2015/2016 Kenya Integrated Household  Budget Survey, randomly generated phone numbers, and UNHCR’s list of registered camp-based  and non-camp-based refugees. Limiting the sample to those self-reporting to be refugees produced  a sample of 948 respondents.    While the broader survey’s primary focus was the economic impact of COVID-19, sections also  addressed  subjective  health  and  well-being,  knowledge  of  COVID-19,  household  and  social  relations, media and information sources used for Covid-19 information, anxieties related to the  pandemic, and perceptions of the adherence of other households to recommended behaviors (e.g.,  social distancing). Questions employed an open response format, where responses were coded by  the  survey  team.  For  instance,  participants  were  asked:  “What  sources  have  provided you with  information about Covid-19?” with the choice to name a medium or a source. Results identified 16  Covid-19 information sources/media and 10 Covid-19 anxiety variables.    Our  dependent  variable  ‘expectations  of  others’  compliance’  was  measured  as  the  number  of  households  out  of  10.  This  measure  is  appropriate  due  to  social  desirability  concerns  biasing  responses to direct questions about individuals’ intentions to comply.  Table 1 shows the demographics of the four sample locations (Dadaab, Kakuma, and Kalobeyei  camps, and other areas) as well as for the overall sample.  While the original survey collected data  on refugees’ county of residence, the anonymized data set released by UNHCR designates location  only as a specific camp  or ‘other.’ While UNHCR  often interprets ‘other’ as ‘urban,’ since  it is  strictly unknown, here we maintain the dataset label of ‘other.’ However, in our analysis, following  UNHCR, we often imply ‘other’ as associated with urban locale. Values represented in parentheses  show the proportion relative to the locales’ sample size. ‘No formal’ indicates no education and preprimary  education;  ‘primary’  indicates  primary  education  and  vocational  schools;  ‘college’  indicates middle level college, university undergraduate, and university postgraduate schooling; and  ‘other’ indicates all other forms of education including Madrassa and Duksi.  In each of the locations the sample consists of more men than women, with the greatest difference  being in the Kalobeyei Settlement where 64% of the respondents are male.  For privacy, participants  ages are partitioned into 5-year intervals.  Participants ages ranged from 18 to 63 and above, with  over 50% falling in the age range of 18 to 38, both in the total sample and in each location.  Some  variation  exists  between  locations  with  regards  to  educational  attainment,  but  in  all  cases  the  majority of individuals have attained either primary or secondary education.  The Dadaab camp has  lower educational attainment rates, but higher forms of other education including madrassa.  In the  non-camp locations, refugees have higher educational attainment levels.  In Tables 2 and 3 below, values represent the number of participants in each location mentioning  the  information  source  or  anxiety  respectively,  with  the  relative  proportion  to  the  sample  in  parentheses.  Since these values come from multiple response questions, proportions will not sum  to 1 for any location.  As indicated in Table 2, information sources ranged from traditional mass media (newspapers, radio,  TV) and newer forms (internet news, Facebook) as well as traditional interpersonal sources such as  friends and family. In between these broadcast and inter-personal modes, are a variety that could  enable sharing of information with small groups or communities (e.g., SMS/WhatsApp) and focus  on the source rather than the medium (religious leaders, local medical professionals, etc.).  In the  combined sample, the most common information sources, in order, are national radio, TV, news on  the internet, international or government agencies, and WhatsApp or SMS.  It’s interesting to note  that four of the top five identified are in fact the medium rather than the source.   For most information sources, significant variation exists between locations.  In ‘other’ locations  the traditional mass  media of TV  and national radio  were the most  popular. The most evident  location-specific differentiation is the usage of local radio in Dadaab, where over 50% of survey  participants reported using the medium as a COVID-19 information source, while less than 15% of  participants in all other locations did.  This is most likely due to the local Somali-language radio  station built and operated in Dadaab. Notable differences also exist between camps in use of news  on the internet and WhatsApp/SMS, which are hardly mentioned in Dadaab but account for roughly  20% of mentions in the other two camps.  In a similar fashion, the frequencies of anxiety sources for each location and the total sample are  available in Table 3.  While a significant factor structure was not identified, subjects identified  anxiety sources that roughly fall into three categories: individual and community health, social  welfare systems, and broader economic concerns and uncertainty. Anxiety related to the two specific  variables death and infection are by far the greatest reported, both overall and consistently in each  location. Over 65% of all participants cite them as a source of anxiety.    Like the information source variables, some variation exists between locations for each anxiety  source, however it is less pronounced.  The greatest difference between locations is in anxiety related  to food security, with the Dadaab camp again being the stand out case, where 32% of surveyed  individuals reported this anxiety, as opposed to the 20% average in the other three locations.  Also,  with the lowest proportions of anxieties concerning food, healthcare, and education, refugees living  outside of camps have the highest proportion of reported anxieties related to employment and the  economy, and 14% cite ‘uncertain ends’ as an anxiety source.  Next, is the data reflecting refugees’ perceptions of the number of households following COVID19 preventative measures. Summary data are depicted in Figure 1 with each panel representing the  location in its title.  Most respondents believe that all other households (10/10) in their community  are adhering to preventative measures. Variation does exist, however, with 21% believing that 5 or  fewer households out of 10 are following these practices.  Overall, on average, respondents believed roughly 8 out of 10 households in their community were  compliant, but a one-way analysis of variance test shows statistically significant differences across  locations.  The location with the highest average is ‘other’ locations (8.80), followed by Dadaab  Camp (8.68), then Kalobeyei (8.00) and  Kakuma (7.49),  in last.   A  follow  up Tukey multiple  pairwise-comparison confirms a statistically significant difference between the means of Kakuma  and Dadaab, Kakuma and other locations, and Kalobeyei and other locations.  These analyses are  shown in full in Tables 4 and 5, with ** indicating p<0.05 and *** indicating p<0.01.  With this  knowledge that perceptions of others vary by location, we have reason to investigate if this is due to  differing information sources and related anxieties.  Next, we examine our research questions using logistic regression models. For a first look at the  effect of information sources on anxieties, a logistic regression model for each anxiety source was  created.  In each model (see Table 6), the anxiety source serves as the dependent variable and the  information sources act as independent variables.  Each column in the table represents a logistic  regression  model  for  the  corresponding  anxiety  source.  Values  in  each  row  are  the  model  coefficients.  The first row displays the Nagelkerke pseudo-R  value for each model.  Each of these  models is significant, but adjusted R  values range from 0.031 to 0.369.    Facebook is the most frequently significant variable (8 out of 9 models) and National Radio and  NGOs or CBOs follow closely behind (7 out of 9 models each).  Some media source variables tend  to have similar coefficient signs across all anxiety models, suggesting these sources systematically  exacerbate or ameliorate anxiety.  Others have mixed effects.  Assessing information sources and numbers of different anxiety sources affected, the ‘consistently  exacerbates anxiety’ category includes TV (3), newspapers (2), and Facebook (8). Conversely, the  information sources in the ‘consistently ameliorates anxiety’ category are ‘News on the Internet’ (6  significant anxiety sources), WhatsApp/SMS (3), and ‘Friends, family, or colleagues’ (5).  In the  mixed-effects category (negative/positive effects on anxiety sources) are national radio (4/3), local  radio (4/2),  international/government agencies (2/2),  and  NGOs/CBOs  (6/1).    Also,  no anxiety  source had a consistent relationship with each information source.  Instead, it appears that each  anxiety  source  had  both  positive  and  negative  significant  relationships  among  the  information  sources.  This further emphasizes the influence of the information source on anxiety.   Also of note are the models with the lowest and highest adjusted R  values.  The models predicting  anxiety related to getting infected and dying have the lowest adjusted R  values, suggesting that  consumption  of  Covid-19  information  does  not  increase  refugee  anxiety  related  to  personal  wellbeing. However, the three models with the  highest adjusted R  values are those predicting  anxiety related to healthcare, food, and infecting others. In contrast to the previous models, Covid19 information consumption plays a relatively more influential role on refugees’ anxiety related to  communal wellbeing.  Finally, we conducted logistic regression analyses of expectations of compliance to assess the joint  impact of information and anxiety (see Table 7).   Variables that had low correlation levels were left  out to reduce dimensionality.  Preliminary analyses included age and gender, but found they were  not  significant  and  did  little  to  improve  the  overall  adjusted  R   value.  Education  is  the  only  significant demographic variable, and only for refugees living outside of camps.  Information  sources’  associations  with  expected  behaviors  in  the  combined  sample  include  significant  positive  effects  (national  and  local  radio),  as  well  as  significant  negative  effects  (Facebook and newspapers). In contrast, the location-specific effects of information sources were  difficult to discern. Between camp comparisons are hindered by differences in camps’ information  sources.  Nevertheless, in the non-camp (‘other’) locations, TV has a significant positive effect on  expectations. In both Dadaab and Kakuma, local radio had a significant positive effect. Hence, the  consistent and mixed relationships between information and anxiety discussed above are not evident  for information and expectations.   Similarly,  the  relationship  between  anxiety  and  expectations  of  compliance  are  mixed.  In  the  combined sample, worries related to infection, infecting others, and education are all negatively  related to expectations, whereas fears over the economy had a positive relationship.  Yet in Dadaab  and Kakuma, anxiety related to death had a positive relationship with expectations. Finally, for those  outside camps, anxiety had mixed effects. Similar to the combined sample, worries over infecting  others and education had a negative impact on expectations, while fears about the economy had a  positive relationship.  Assessing the models and predictors overall, each logistic regression model is significant under Chisquare goodness of fit tests and each has an adjusted R  value of 0.38 or greater.  Across locations,  the model’s explanatory power is greatest for Dadaab and least effective for non-camp locations.  Systematic assessment of information and anxiety effects show some consistency in effect.  For  example, local radio was a significant predictor in Dadaab and Kakuma. Similarly, death anxiety  had a positive effect on expectations in both Dadaab and Kakuma. Consequently, it can be concluded  that while information sources and anxieties have differing effects, both positive and negative, and  their significance varies by location, consistent effects do exist.  <title>5.     Discussion and Conclusion </title> Generally,  this  research  extends  knowledge  of  the  impact  of  information  sources  on  refugees’  infectious disease anxiety and perceptions of others, taking into account location. Specifically, the  study examined the relationships between unique information sources and sources of Covid-19  anxiety, and then the relationship between both information source and anxiety with behavioral  expectations of others. These findings contribute further evidence of the role of location on type of  media use in infectious disease information dissemination. Following and expanding on the work of  Bekalu and  Eggermont  (2014)  and  Agegnehu  and  Tesema  (2020)  in  Ethiopia,  our  study  finds  locational differences in media types used in Kenya.  In our sample, the traditional mass media of  TV and national radio are more commonly used by refugees in non-camp locales, as compared to  their  camp-based  counterparts.  However,  we  also  demonstrate  differences  between  rural  areas,  highlighting the place-based nature of some media types, complementing the micro-scale analysis  of Peters and Schroder’s (2018) media repertoires research.  It is worth noting the population density  differences between typical rural communities and refugee camps.  While the camps in this study  were rurally located and had a similar lack of nearby infrastructure and resources, their population  density provides increased potential for social interaction not typically seen in rural communities.  Overall, this research finds refugees’ anxiety sources fall into three general categories: individual  and community health, social welfare systems, and broader economic concerns and uncertainty.  Between camps and other locales, the nature of anxieties differed. In camps, COVID-19 anxieties  were related to community health and social welfare, such as food security and healthcare, while  refugees living outside  of camps were more concerned  with broader economic trends. Further,  between-camp  comparisons  highlighted  differences,  such  as  the  concern  over  food  security  in  Dadaab, which is less evident in Kakuma and Kalobeyei. These findings extend the research on  refugees’ anxiety  related  to  infectious disease (Hermans et al., 2017; El-Khatib et al., 2020) by  analyzing locational differences in the sources of anxiety.  Critically, this study provides unique insights into the relationships between anxiety sources and  media types through regression  models.  These  models  help  delineate  media’s  relationship  with  specific sources of anxiety. Media have the lowest impact on anxiety related to personal wellbeing  (getting  infected  and  dying)  and  the  highest  impact  on  communal  wellbeing  (infecting  others,  healthcare, and food).  The analysis also identified media that consistently ameliorate or exacerbate  different anxieties such as Facebook (exacerbating) and news on the Internet (ameliorating).   A further unique contribution is insights into the the joint impact of information sources and anxiety  on expectations of others’ adherence to recommended Covid-19 behaviors. As media are expected  to play a role in shaping individuals’ perceptions of others’ adherence to recommended behaviors  (Allington  et  al.,  2020),  such  expectations  can,  in  turn,  influence  individual  compliance.  Of  particular note in the analysis is the systematic lack of effect of age and gender, and only a locationspecific effect of education. These results deviate from findings related to the role of demographics  in general in refugee media use (Pahayahay and Khalili-Mahani, 2020), and gender in particular as  relates to refugees’ mobile phone use (Canevez et al. 2021). The limited effect of demographics  suggests programs promoting compliance can have broad but locationally-specific effects.  This combined analysis builds bridges between the disparate media effects and anxiety research in  the specific domain of infectious disease behavioral compliance. Whereas Harper et al. (2020) and  Clark et al. (2020) find fear of the virus promotes compliance, Allington et al. (2020) point to media.  The results showing fear of death as related to expectations of others in Dadaab and Kakuma lend  further support to the notion that fear of the virus is associated with compliance. In addition is the  positive relationship between fear of economic impact and compliance expectations. Conversely,  this  work identifies  anxieties  that  may hinder  compliance,  namely fear  of  infecting  others and  anxiety about education. Similarly, these findings of the positive relationship between national and  local radio as well as TV on perceptions of compliance lend further support to Allington et al.’s  (2020) findings, but add the caveat that in Kenyan context, these results will vary by locale.  As such, a key contribution of our overall study is the importance of location in not only assessing  anxiety and  sources  of  information  but  on  crafting  effective responses  to reduce  anxieties  and  promote  behavioral  compliance.  This  study has  highlighted  the  locational  differences  not  only  between urban and rural locales, but between different rural locales – a finding that may be related  to unique sociocultural context of refugee camps, which in the Kenyan context tends to host refugees  from different nations. Nevertheless, we do find some consistency in effects of information sources  on various anxieties, with some that consistently exacerbate (e.g., Facebook) others ameliorate (e.g.,  news from the internet), while still others having mixed effects (e.g., radio).   In summary, this study is the first of its kind to examine the relationship between Covid-19 media  use and anxiety, with further implications for community expectations concerning compliance with  recommended behaviors.  It demonstrates significant differences in Covid-19 media use between  camps and other locations, as well as between camps themselves.  Locational differences in sources  of anxiety were also found, although less notable than those in media use. These findings have  implications for scholarship on infectious disease management in refugee hosting nations, as well  as practical implications for designing information campaigns to reduce anxiety and encourage  compliance with recommended behaviors.  <title>REFERENCES</title> Agegnehu, C. D., & Tesema, G. A. (2020). Effect of mass media on comprehensive knowledge of  HIV/AIDS and its spatial distribution among reproductive-age women in Ethiopia: a spatial  and multilevel analysis. BMC Public Health, 20(1), 1-12.  Allington, D., Duffy, B., Wessely, S., Dhavan, N., & Rubin, J. (2020). Health-protective behaviour,  social media usage, and conspiracy belief during the COVID-19 public health emergency.  Psychological Medicine, 47, 459-469  Bekalu, M. A., & Eggermont, S. (2014). Media use and HIV/AIDS knowledge: A knowledge gap  perspective. Health Promotion International, 29(4), 739–750.  Boateng, A. (2010). Survival voices: Social capital and the well-being of liberian refugee women in  Ghana. Journal of Immigrant & Refugee Studies, 8(4), 386-408.  Braunack-Mayer, A., Tooher, R., Collins, J. E., Street, J. M., & Marshall, H. (2013). Understanding  the  school  community’s  response  to  school  closures  during  the  H1N1  2009  influenza  pandemic. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 1–15.   Bukuluki, P., Mwenyango, H., Katongole, S. P., Sidhva, D., & Palattiyil, G. (2020). The socioeconomic and psychosocial impact of Covid-19 pandemic on urban refugees in Uganda.  Social Sciences & Humanities Open, 2(1), 100045.   Cava, M. A., Fay, K. E., Beanlands, H. J., McCay, E. A., & Wignall, R. (2005). Risk perception and  compliance with  quarantine during the SARS  outbreak. Journal of Nursing Scholarship,  37(4), 343–347.  Clark, C., Davila, A., Regis, M., & Kraus, S. (2020). Predictors of COVID-19 voluntary compliance  behaviors: An international investigation. Global Transitions, 2, 76–82.   Desclaux,  A.,  Badji,  D.,  Ndione,  A.  G.,  &  Sow,  K.  (2017).  Accepted  monitoring  or  endured  quarantine? Ebola contacts’ perceptions in Senegal. Social Science and Medicine, 178(1),  38–45.   El-Khatib, Z., Nsour, M. Al, Khader, Y. S., & Khudair, M. A. (2020). Mental health support in  Jordan for the general population and for the refugees in the Zaatari camp during the period  of COVID-19 lockdown. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy,  12(5), 511–514.   Farooq, A., Laato, S., & Najmul Islam, A. K. M. (2020). Impact of online information on selfisolation  intention  during  the  COVID-19  Pandemic:  Cross-Sectional  study.  Journal  of  Medical Internet Research, 22(5), 1–15.  Harper, C. A., Satchell, L. P., Fido, D., & Latzman, R. D. (2020). Functional Fear Predicts Public  Health Compliance in the COVID-19 Pandemic. International Journal of Mental Health and  Addiction.  Hameed, S., Sadiq, A., & Din, A. U. (2018). The Increased Vulnerability of Refugee Population to  Mental Health Disorders. Kansas journal of medicine, 11(1), 1–12.  Hermans, M. P. J., Kooistra, J., Cannegieter, S. C., Rosendaal, F. R., Mook-Kanamori, D. O., &  Nemeth, B. (2017). Healthcare and disease burden among refugees in long-stay refugee  camps at Lesbos, Greece. European Journal of Epidemiology, 32(9), 851–854.   Ho, S. S. (2012). The knowledge gap hypothesis in Singapore: The roles of socioeconomic status,  mass media, and interpersonal discussion on public knowledge of the H1N1 flu pandemic.  Mass Communication and Society, 15(5), 695–717.   Internet  Users  Statistics  for  Africa.    https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats1.html  Retrieved  November 20th 2020  Jang, S., & Park, M. (2016). Do New Media Substitute for Old Media?: A Panel Analysis of Daily  Media Use. Journal of Media Economics, 29(2), 73–91.   Jones, J. H., & Salathé, M. (2009). Early assessment of anxiety and behavioral response to novel  swine-origin influenza a(H1N1). PLoS ONE, 4(12), 2–9.  Kim, S. J. (2016). A repertoire approach to cross-platform media use behavior. New Media and  Society, 18(3), 353–372.   Kioko Ireri.  High Job Satisfaction Despite Low Income: A National Study of Kenyan Journalists.   Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 2016, 93(1) 164– 186.  Namunwa,  Kevin. Kenya leads Africa in  Smartphone usage,  Business  Daily, March 11,  2019.  https://businesstoday.co.ke/kenya-leads-africa-smartphone-usage/    Obuya, Jared and Charles Ong’ondo  (2019)  “Caught  between  a  Rock  and  a  Hard  Place”:  How  Kenyan Journalists are Coping with Pressure for Media Accountability. African Journalism  Studies, 40(2), 1-15  Pahayahay,  A.,  &  Khalili-Mahani,  N.  (2020).  What  media  helps,  what  media  hurts:  A  mixed  methods survey study of coping with COVID-19 using the media repertoire framework and  the appraisal theory of stress. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(8).   Peters, C., & Schrøder, K. C. (2018). Beyond the here and now of news audiences: A process-based  framework for investigating news repertoires. Journal of Communication, 68(6), 1079–1103.  Rees,  S.,  &  Fisher,  J.  (2020).  COVID-19  and  the  Mental  Health  of  People  From  Refugee  Backgrounds. International Journal of Health Services, 50(4), 415–417.   Seuferling, P.  (2019). “We demand better ways to  communicate”: Pre-digital media practices in  refugee camps. Media and Communication, 7(2), 207–217.   Tichenor, P. J., Donohue, G. A., & Olien, C. N. (1970). Mass media flow and differential growth in  knowledge. Public opinion quartely, 34(2), 159-170.  Tippens, J. A. (2020). Urban Congolese Refugees’ Social Capital and Community Resilience During  a Period of Political Violence in Kenya: A Qualitative Study. Journal of Immigrant and  Refugee Studies, 18(1), 42–59.  Vonnahme,  L.  A.,  Lankau,  E.  W.,  Ao,  T.,  Shetty,  S.,  &  Lopes  Cardozo,  B.  (2015).  Factors  Associated with Symptoms of Depression among Bhutanese Refugees in the United States.  Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 17(6), 1705–1714.   Ward, M., Poleacovschi, C., Faust, K., Weems, C. F., & Gabiam, N. (2020). Evaluating the Role of  Infrastructure Components and Demographics on Social Capital in Refugee Camps. Journal  of Management in Engineering, 36(3).  Webster, R. K., Brooks, S. K., Smith, L. E., Woodland, L., Wessely, S., & Rubin, G. J. (2020). How  to improve adherence with quarantine: rapid review of the evidence. Public Health, 182(1),  163–169.    World Bank Group. (2020). WB Kenya Covid-19 Rapid Response Phone Survey : Questionnaire –  Wave  1.  Washington,  D.C.:  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/585981590070926292/Questionnaire-Wave-1.  World  Bank  Group.  (2020).    Kenya  Literacy  Rates.  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?locations=KE.  Retrieved  November 23rd, 2020. 