Title: The Missing Covariate Indicator Method is Nearly Valid Almost Always  Authors: Mingyang Song, Authors’ Affiliations:  Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.  Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.  Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  Center for Interdisciplinary Research in AIDS, Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.  The Analysis Group, Boston, MA, USA.  Abbreviations: HPFS, Health Professionals Follow-up Study; MAR, missing at random; MCAR, missing completely at random; MCIM, missing covariate indicator method; NHS, Nurses’ Health Study.  Corresponding author: Donna Spiegelman, ScD  60 College St New Haven, CT 06510, United States Phone: (617) 835-5119 Email: donna.spiegelman@yale.edu  Conflicts of Interest The authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.  Source of Fund This work was supported by grants of DPES025459 and K99CA215314 from the National Institutes of Health; by the 2017 AACR-AstraZeneca Fellowship in Immuno-oncology Research (Grant Number 17-40-12-SONG) from the American Association for Cancer Research; and by a Mentored Research Scholar Grant (MRSG-17-220-01 – NEC) in Applied and Clinical Research from the American Cancer Society. The authors assume full responsibility for analyses and interpretation of these data.  The data and computing code required to replicate the results reported in this work can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author directly.  Background: Although the missing covariate indicator method (MCIM) has been shown to be biased under extreme conditions, the degree and determinants of bias have not been formally assessed.  Methods: We derived the formula for the relative bias in the MCIM and systematically investigated conditions under which bias arises.  Results: We found that the extent of bias is independent of both the disease rate and the exposure-outcome association, but is a function of 5 parameters: exposure and covariate prevalences, covariate missingness proportion, and associations of covariate with exposure and outcome. The MCIM was unbiased when the missing covariate is a risk factor for the outcome but not a confounder. The average median relative bias was zero across each of the parameters over a wide range of values considered. When missingness was no greater than 50%, less than 5% of the scenarios considered had relative bias greater than 10%. In several analyses of the Harvard cohort studies, the MCIM produced materially the same results as the multiple imputation method.  Conclusion: The MCIM is nearly valid almost always in settings typically encountered in epidemiology and its continued use is recommended, unless the covariate is missing in an extreme proportion or acts as a strong confounder.  Keywords: confounding, missing covariate indicator method, multiple imputation, relative bias.  Missing data is a common problem encountered in many epidemiologic and clinical studies. It can occur in any of the variables in a study, including exposure, outcome, or covariates that may or may not be confounders of the exposure-outcome relationship. treat missing data in potential confounders differently than missing data in the primary outcome and exposure variables for analysis. For example, missing data on outcomes can seriously compromise inferences from clinical trials, and robust prevention and treatment measures have been summarized. outcome are typically excluded from the study. That is, not having data on the outcome of interest or the exposure under investigation is a primary exclusion criterion for most studies. If participants who are included in the study population are different in ways that lead to bias in the estimated measure of exposure-outcome association, selection bias results. In general, selection bias in the relative risk will result when the probability of being included in the study population depends jointly on exposure and outcome status, after properly controlling for confounders. Methods to deal with selection bias have been an active research area and will not be discussed any further here. As the simplest approach, complete-case analysis is inefficient and can be biased, because subjects with complete data recorded for all covariates can be a small and biased subsample of the study subjects. been developed during the past few decades, such as inverse probability weighting, multiple imputation, and maximum likelihood. validity is dependent on correct specification of an additional model, empirically unverifiable assumptions that can pose even greater challenges for complex models in longitudinal settings. be prohibitive in large epidemiologic studies and even more so in this era of ‘big data’.  Another simple approach for missing covariates is the indicator method (MCIM), where a missing indicator is created and added to the model for each variable with missing data. missing indicator takes the value 1 whenever the original variable is missing, and 0 otherwise. We then assign the value of 0 to the original covariate for all those originally missing on the covariate. Formally, let value of the covariate that is sometimes missing. The new variables are apply the MCIM method to a stratified 2x2 table analysis, we stratify by both the missing indicator and the recoded original variable (with missing values replaced by 0) to estimate the relative risk, or, in a regression analysis, we control for both  Because all participants are included in the analysis, the missing indicator method is more efficient than the complete-case analysis. Although the missing indicator method has been shown to be biased under extreme conditions, formally assessed. Therefore, in this study, we performed numerical calculations for the bias arising from the MCIM. To put our findings in the context of large cohort studies, we also compared the results from previously published studies that have used both the MCIM and the multiple imputation method.  Notation.  For illustrative purposes, we considered a binary exposure ( For the covariate C that is missing in some participants, the missing indicator method stratifies the data by three levels of the covariate: assume that the missing covariate mechanism is completely at random (MCAR), that is, that the probability of missingness of the covariate is independent of any observed or unobserved data included in the primary outcome model. The stratified 2x2 tables for unconfounded by the covariate outcome. The stratum with missing covariate is a crude table, collapsed over the two levels of the covariate. Therefore, it may yield a biased exposure estimate if convergent value of the final summary effect estimate of relative risk, average of the convergent value of one biased estimate, of two valid estimates, formed by levels of the covariate, usually the case that this assumption is valid  Thus, -of participants with the missing covariate. We derived an expression for 5 underlying parameters (see Appendix 1): the prevalence of the exposure, of the covariate, the outcome,  --$#', and the association between the exposure and the covariate, --$(7#'.  In many epidemiologic and clinical studies, the parameter of interest is the odds ratio. If the prevalence of the outcome, that is, approximates the relative risk well. Then, formula (1) applies to the odds ratio as well.  In Appendix 2, we investigate under what circumstances the above formula applies when the missing covariate data mechanism is missing at random (MAR), that is, when the probability of missingness of the covariate depends only upon variables that are never missing in the data. We show that formula (1) is valid when missingness is independent of the outcome, even when covariate missingness depends on the exposure,  Numerical Bias Evaluation of the MCIM.  Based on the ranges typically encountered in epidemiologic studies, we assigned a range of values to each of the 5 determining parameters for the relative risk estimate for the effect of the covariate on the outcome to range from 1/5 to 5. We then calculated the each of the 5 parameters over the range. Because we were able to obtain a closed-form analytic expression for this paper does not include any.  The extent of covariate missingness in large observational cohort studies  45, the quantity of interest in this study, there is no need for simulations and  To examine the extent to which missingness occurs in some typical epidemiologic studies, we calculated the proportion of missing covariate data in two large cohort studies, the Nurses’ Health Study (NHS) I and II, using breast cancer risk factors as an example. The NHS I is a prospective cohort which began in 1976 when 121,700 female nurses aged 30-55 years completed a mailed health questionnaire. the NHS II, comprised of 116,430 female nurses aged 25-42 years. were mailed biennially to members of the two cohorts to update lifestyle and medical information. Diet was assessed using a validated food frequency questionnaire years. We calculated the proportion of person-years for which the variables were missing among the total person-years. We considered a variety of reproductive and lifestyle breast cancer risk factors, including age at first birth, alcohol consumption, history of benign breast disease, family history breast cancer, age at menarche, age of menopause, physical activity, oral contraceptive use, postmenopausal hormone use, and body mass index.  Comparison of the results produced by MCIM and multiple imputation  Because investigators who use MCIM in their primary analyses are occasionally asked by reviewers to use multiple imputation for missing covariate data, at least as a sensitivity analysis, we performed a head-to-head comparison of the results produced by the two methods in the five published studies, and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS), where this was requested. The HPFS is an observational cohort that enrolled 51,529 male health professionals aged 40-75 years in 1986. Similar follow-up procedures have been used as in the NHS I and II. When the covariate with missingness is a risk factor but not a confounder (or neither), the MCIM is unbiased  It is immediately evident from equation (1) that when Often, risk factors for the outcome are adjusted for in the analysis when they are not confounders; in many models, doing so will improve the precision of the estimate of the parameter of interest, here, causal inference, investigators will adjust for known and suspected risk factors for the outcome even when they might not be confounders, in case they are. When this adjustment turns out to be unnecessary for validity purposes, as might often be the case, the MCIM method will be unbiased.  Within each unique combination of the 5 parameters determining median, 25 was higher than 5% and 10% (Table 3). The median of value averaged over all the others, with the 25 extreme cases, such as when the covariate missingness proportion exceeded 25%, or when the exposure or covariate was associated with a five-fold increase in risk of the outcome. Furthermore,   and 75 percentile of 45, as well as the percentage of instances where 45  45 exceeded 10% in only 1.1% of the parameter space explored. For example,  45 was greater than 10% in 4.8% of the scenarios considered when the covariate was missing in half of the study population, and was greater than 10% in 4.3% of the scenarios considered when the covariate was a strong confounder, with a relative risk for the outcome in relation to the confounder greater than 5. Even a column of Table 3, was a rare event in most scenarios considered here.  We explored the extent of missing covariate data in some well-established cohort studies, using the NHS I and II as an example. We calculated the proportion of missing data among common risk factors for breast cancer measured in these studies. As shown in Table 4, most risk factors were missing less than 5% of the person-time under follow-up and the extent of missingness rarely exceeded 10%.  No difference between results from MCIM and multiple imputation  Because MCIM has been considered a biased method, studies that use this method in their primary analysis are occasionally asked by journal reviewers to run additional analyses using more sophisticated methods for handling missing covariate data, such as multiple imputation. Therefore, to assess the extent to which the results are changed after switching from MCIM to multiple imputation, we compiled results from published studies in the three Harvard cohorts that have used both methods in the analysis. As shown in Table 5, multiple imputation yielded materially the same results as MCIM in all cases considered.  We derived an explicit expression for the bias associated with the use of MCIM. We were then able to show that when the covariate is not a confounder, MCIM is unbiased. We also conducted extensive numerical bias evaluations over a wide range of values typically encountered in epidemiologic settings for each parameter that determines the percent bias in MCIM. We found that the bias in MCIM was minimal in all but the most extreme cases. This result was further supported by empirical comparisons of results using the MCIM and multiple imputation in published studies.  Despite the ease of use, MCIM has generally been considered an unacceptably biased method for dealing with missing covariate data. This perception is largely based on two commonly cited studies published in 1990s. of the bias due to MCIM and concluded that “an important result of our empiric investigation is that creating an additional category for the missing values always yields biased results”. However, this conclusion was drawn based on an assessment using extreme values for the parameters that determine the bias. For example, the authors used a relative risk of 0.36 for the outcome associated with covariate ( the exposure and the covariate ( indeed likely to produce biased results. However, these extreme values are rarely encountered in epidemiologic studies, and for them both to occur simultaneously in a single study setting is extremely unlikely.  Similarly, in the simulation study by Greenland and Finkle was set at 50%, indicating that half of the participants had missing data, and the resulting values for --$('  produced by the MCIM ranged from 1.43 to 1.58 when the true --$(' was 2. Again, this relatively large bias is not surprising, given that, as shown in our Table 3, at 46 $# than 5%. Therefore, although it may first appear that our results are in conflict with the findings of these two previous studies, once the empirical values used in these investigations are considered, it is clear that while substantial bias can occur in rare, extreme cases, the bias is at most moderate in typical epidemiologic studies. This conclusion is consistent with the head-tohead comparisons of MCIM and multiple imputation in published studies from the Harvard cohorts  While our derivation for the MCIM-related bias is based on the MCAR assumption, we also investigated under what circumstances the same formula (1) would apply when the missing covariate data mechanism is MAR. As demonstrated in Appendix 2, we found that the formula is valid in the case of MAR, as long as missingness of the covariate is independent of the outcome. This would typically be the case in cohort studies and in nested case-control studies, but may not be reasonable in population-based case-control studies. It should be noted that other methods, including the maximum likelihood and multiple imputation approaches, are also based on the MAR assumption. Finally, although for ease of communication we considered only one additional risk factor for the outcome as a possible determinant of the MAR mechanism, it is a simple extension that an arbitrary number of  work, simply by mapping them all into a single high or low risk indicator or through a propensity score. In summary, through a comprehensive and systematic assessment using several approaches, we found no to minimal bias arising from the use of MCIM under a quite large range of circumstances that are typically encountered in epidemiologic studies. The continued use of  '=0.50, about 9% of scenarios across the other parameters result in a 45 greater  MCIM is recommended unless the covariate is missing in an extreme proportion or acts as a strong confounder, with a relative risk for the outcome in relation to the confounder greater than 5 or with a very strong association between the exposure and confounder, both of which rarely occur in practice. 