Mathematical Institute, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Institute for Computer Science, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Institute for Computer Science, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Institute of Mathematical Stochastics, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany Institute for Stochastics, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, 09596 Freiberg, Germany Institute for Computer Science, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Since the groundbreaking work of Steinhaus (1948), cake-cutting is a metaphor for the socalled fair division problem for a divisible, heterogeneous good, which addresses the problem to split a contested quantity (a “cake”) in a fair way among several parties A, B, C, . . . ; each party may have its own idea about the value of the diﬀerent parts of the cake. A traditional way of fair division between two parties A and B would be to let A divide the cake into two pieces (depending on their own valuation) while B has the right to choose one of the pieces, the so-called cut & choose protocol. There are other possibilities for two Cake-cutting is a playful name for the fair division of a heterogeneous, divisible good among agents, a well-studied problem at the intersection of mathematics, economics, and artiﬁcial intelligence. The cake-cutting literature is rich and edifying. However, diﬀerent model assumptions are made in its many papers, in particular regarding the set of allowed pieces of cake that are to be distributed among the agents and regarding the agents’ valuation functions by which they measure these pieces. We survey the commonly used definitions in the cake-cutting literature, highlight their strengths and weaknesses, and make some recommendations on what deﬁnitions could be most reasonably used when looking through the lens of measure theory. parties as well as extensions to more than two parties (see, e.g., Procaccia, 2016; Lindner & Rothe, 2015, for an overview). Yet, while the basic rules of the game are pretty clear, the assumptions on the actual cutting process are often treated in a gentlemanlike manner. If the whole cake is represented by an interval, say [0, 1], many authors think of the pieces as “intervals,” without specifying whether the intervals are open (a, b) ⊂ [0, 1], half-open (a, b], [a, b) ⊂ [0, 1], or closed [a, b] ⊆ [0, 1], and how to treat the – possibly twice counted – end points, i.e., [0, point set like { a formal mathematical approach to cake-cutting needs to address questions like: For some cases, there is an obvious answer: If we use only ﬁnitely many cuts, ﬁnite unions of intervals of the form ha, bi – where the angular braces indicate either open or closed ends – is all we can get; and if, in addition, any single point a ∈ [0, 1] has zero value, we do not have to care about the open or closed ends anymore. We will see in Section 2.1 below that this rather implicit assumption brings us in a much more potent framework that can eﬀectively deal with a countably inﬁnite number of cuts. the following example shows. Example 1.1 (Cantor dust; Cantor’s ternary set). Start with the complete cake as a single piece, i.e., A piece A the middle third of both remaining pieces in A on, we will remove countably many open intervals, and the remainder set is C The set C one can show that this is a closed set, which has more than countably many points, does not contain any interval, and is dense in itself, i.e., each of its points is a limit point of a sequence inside C recursively removed pieces have total length so that C tervals, each having length p again, closed, uncountable, and does not contain any interval. If, say, p = intervals have total length is not quite expected. • Are (open, closed, half-open) intervals the only possible pieces of cake? • Do we allow for ﬁnitely many or inﬁnitely many cuts (a “cut” being the split of any subset of [0, 1] at a single point)? • Which properties should a valuation function have, and how does it interact with the family of admissible pieces of cake? As soon as we allow for countably inﬁnitely many cuts, things change dramatically, as = A\ (/3,/3) = [0,/3] ∪ [/3, 1] comprising two closed intervals. Next, cut out = [0,/9] ∪ [/9,/3] ∪ [/3,/9] ∪ [/9, 1], see Figure 1. If this procedure is repeated on andT The same construction principle, removing at each stage 2identical open middle inunnatural to speak of the “length” of a dust-like set as C (one-dimensional) Lebesgue measure, which is the mathematically formal extension of the familiar notion of “length.” appendix as Example A.1. sets which may not be written as a countable union of intervals; moreover, although these sets consist of limit points only, they may have strictly positive length. to a family of subsets which contains (i) ﬁnite unions, (ii) countable intersections, and (iii) complements of its members, leading to fairly complicated subsets as, e.g., C when calculating the length of all removed intervals, we tacitly assumed As it will turn out, these are two far-reaching assumptions on the interplay of the valuation function (here: length) with its domain; we will see how this relates to the desirable property that we can cut oﬀ pieces of arbitrary length `, 0 ≤ ` ≤ 1, from the cake [0, 1] (allowing for any valuation values of the cut-oﬀ pieces). Lindner & Rothe, 2015) a (piece-wise constant) valuation function v : P → [0, 1], where P is some family of subsets of the cake, is represented as shown in Figure 2: The cake X = [0, 1] is split horizontally into multiple pieces and the number of vertically stacked boxes per piece describes the piece’s valuation from some agent’s perspective. For example, the valuation function v in Figure 2 evaluates the piece X example in mind, one is tempted to assume that P can always be taken as the power set P = P(X) = {A | A ⊆ X}. While it is intuitive that the removed intervals should have a certain length, it feels An alternative, slightly more formal way of illustrating the Cantor dust is given in the This example shows that, as soon as we allow for countably many cuts, there can appear An important feature of this example is the fact that we extend the family of intervals • the (ﬁnite) additivity of length: the length of two disjoint sets is the sum of their lengths • the countable or σ-additivity which plays the role of a continuity property: the length of a countable union is the limit of the length of the union of the ﬁrst N sets as N → ∞. Commonly, in cake-cutting theory (see, e.g., Brams & Taylor, 1996; Procaccia, 2016; valuation function that assigns to intervals ha, bi ⊆ [0, 1] their natural length b − a, and which is additive, σ-additive (in the sense explained above), and able to assign a value to every set A ⊆ [0, 1]. Things are diﬀerent if we do not require σ-additivity (see the discussion in Schilling & Kühn, 2021, § 7.31). Example 1.2 (Vitali, 1905; see also, e.g., Schilling, 2017, and Schilling & Kühn, 2021). Let X = [0, 1] be the standard cake, and assume that the valuation function v is σ-additive (see Deﬁnition 2.2), assigning to any interval its natural length. This means, in particular, that v is invariant under translations and evaluates the complete cake with v(X) = 1. Let us deﬁne the relation ∗ as follows: We say that two real numbers x, y ∈ R satisfy the relation ∗ if, and only if, x − y ∈ Q, i.e., their diﬀerence is rational. The relation ∗ is an equivalence relation and the corresponding equivalence classes [x] = {y ∈ R | x∗y} ⊆ R lead to a disjoint partitioning of R. By the axiom of choice, there is a set V ⊂ X which contains exactly one representative of every equivalence class [x]. A set like V is called a Vitali set. Clearly, V ∈ P(X) and the sets q + V = {q + x mod 1 | x ∈ V }, q ∈ Q, are a disjoint partition of [0, 1]; thus the same value (translation invariance). Hence, we end up with the contradiction Thus v cannot have the power set of the cake [0, 1] as its domain. piece can only be evaluated if the valuation function is not too simplistic. On the other hand, a Vitali set cannot be evaluated at all if we request too many properties of a valuation function, i.e., the domain P(X) consisting of all possible pieces of cake is, in general, too large. 1996; Robertson & Webb, 1998, and the book chapters by Procaccia, 2016; Lindner & Rothe, 2015), there exist several diﬀerent assumptions on the underlying model. Our goal is to review thoroughly and comprehensively all the diﬀerent models that are currently applied in the literature. Furthermore, we study the relationships between these models Figure 2: Common representation for a valuation function in cake-cutting. The following classical example from measure theory shows that there cannot exist a 1 = v([0, 1)) = ν(q + V )=v(q + V ) = The above examples highlight some of the problems when evaluating sets. A Cantor-like Across the research ﬁeld of cake-cutting (see, e.g., the textbooks by Brams & Taylor, and formulate some related results. It turns out that some of these models are problematic and should not be used as they are formulated. We highlight these models’ problems and provide speciﬁc examples showing why they are problematic. Our overall goal is to determine a model, which is as simple as possible, yet powerful enough to cope with these problems and still compatible with many of the currently used models. sumptions or from formalizing their model in detail. For example, Brams, Taylor, and Zwicker (1997, p. 553) write: for any given purpose, and which are not. If we allow only a ﬁxed number of cuts, splitting the cake X = [0, 1] into a ﬁnite number of pieces of the type ha, bi ⊆ [0, 1], a naive approach is always possible: The valuation should be additive and its domain contains unions of ﬁnitely many intervals. If, on the other hand, there are potentially inﬁnitely many cuts – e.g., if the players play a game resulting in an a priori not ﬁxed number of rounds – the limiting case cannot any longer be treated by a ﬁnitely additive valuation and a domain containing only ﬁnite unions, see Example 1.1. the issues described above. We will see that, at least for the cake X = [0, 1], even the naive approach plus the requirement that we can split every piece ha, bi by a single cut into any proportion (in fact, a slightly weaker requirement will do, cf. Deﬁnition 2.2 (D)), automatically leads to the measure-theoretic point of view. That is to say that in many natural situations the naive standpoint is “practically safe” since its obvious shortcomings are automatically “ﬁxed by (measure) theory”, if one uses the correct formulation. Throughout this paper, X = [0, 1] denotes a standard cake, and the power set P(X) = {S | S ⊆ X} are all possible pieces of cake from a set-theoretic point of view. We deﬁne P ⊆ P(X) as the set of all admissible pieces of X, i.e., those pieces which (a) can be allocated to some players via a cake-cutting protocol, and (b) can be evaluated by the players using their valuation functions. Some results remain true in a more general setting with more general cakes X; to highlight this, we will speak of an “abstract” cake X. For example, an abstract cake X might be contained in an n-dimensional unit cube: X ⊆ [0, 1] We start by formulating requirements for P regarding the admissible pieces of cake. Obviously, we want to be able to allocate the complete cake X as well as an empty piece ∅ to a Frequently, authors proposing cake-cutting protocols abstain from making formal as- “Many feel that the informality adds to the subject’s simplicity and charm, and we would concur. But charm and simplicity are not the only factors determining the direction in which mathematics moves or should move. Our analysis in this paper raises several issues that may only admit a resolution via some negative results. While such results may not require complete formalization of what is permissible, they do appear to require partial versions. We will refer to such partial limitations as theses.” It would thus be desirable to have some common consensus on which models are useful We propose to use ideas from measure theory, which provides the right toolbox to tackle player and therefore, X ∈ P and ∅ ∈ P must hold. If A ⊆ X is already allocated to some player, i.e., A ∈ P, then we want to be able to give the remainder of the cake to another player; so for all A ∈ P, we demand that the complement of A, denoted by A = X \ A, is in P. Furthermore, we want to be able to cut and combine pieces of cake; so for all A, B ∈ P, we require A ∪ B ∈ P. Note that A ∩ B = A ∪ B and A \ B = A ∩ B, so our previously formulated requirements also allow us to allocate the intersection of a ﬁnite number of pieces of cake and to evaluate the diﬀerence of two pieces of cake. Deﬁnition 2.1. Let X be an arbitrary abstract cake. A family A ⊆ P(X) is called an algebra over X if ∅ ∈ A and for all A, B ∈ A it holds that A and A ∪ B ∈ A. the set of all admissible pieces of cake, we ended up with a well-studied, structured concept from measure theory: an algebra. For instance, if X = [0, 1], then P(X) and {∅, X} are algebras – in fact these are the largest possible and the smallest possible algebras over X. Another useful algebra is the family I(X) of all unions of ﬁnitely many intervals in X – and it is easy to check that I(X) is the smallest algebra containing all closed (or all open or all half-open) intervals from X. While it is obvious that {∅, X} is useless for our purpose, as then only two possible pieces can be allocated, the complete cake and an empty piece, we might – at the other extreme – also take P(X) as the set for the admissible pieces of X. However, when choosing P, we must also ensure that meaningful valuation functions can exist for this set, and Example 1.2 shows that for a rather natural valuation function – geometric length – P(X) is too big. function v shall assign to any admissible piece of cake A ∈ P some nonnegative real number, i.e., v : P → [0, ∞]. In order to normalize the players’ valuations and keep them comparable, we demand that v(∅) = 0 and v(X) = 1 hold. Hence, we can further limit the valuation function’s range to [0, 1], i.e., we have v : P → [0, 1]. The next deﬁnition lists further requirements for a valuation function. Deﬁnition 2.2. Let X be an abstract cake and A the algebra of admissible pieces. A valuation function is a function v : A → [0, 1], which is normalized, i.e., v(∅) = 0 and v(X) = 1. (M) monotone if for A, B ∈ A with A ⊆ B, one has v(A) ≤ v(B); (A) additive or ﬁnitely additive if for all A, B ∈ A such that A ∩ B = ∅, one has (D) divisible if for every A ∈ A and for every real number α, 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, there exists It is worth noting that only by the formulation of intuitive requirements with respect to Let us list the common requirements for the players’ valuation functions. A valuation v(A ∪ B) = v(A) + v(B); that A∩ A= ∅ (i 6= j) andA∈ A, one has v(A) =v(A); some A∈ A with A⊆ A such that v(A) = αv(A). equivalent to the so-called strong additivity, deﬁned as v(A∪B) = v(A)+v(B)−v(A∩B): Just observe that A ∪ B = [A \ (A ∩ B)] ∪ [B \ (A ∩ B)] ∪ [A ∩ B], i.e., A ∩ B 6= ∅ counts towards both v(A) and v(B) but only once in v(A ∪ B), hence the correction −v(A ∩ B). Finally, (strong) additivity implies monotonicity. above manipulations with sets without ever leaving A. Note, however, that (Σ) and (D) impose further assumptions on the structure of A. Remark 2.3. Let X be a(n abstract) cake and A ⊆ P(X) an algebra over X. Any additive valuation is also a ﬁnitely additive measure with total mass v(X) = 1 (see, e.g., Schilling, 2017, Chapter 4). entails that any N ∈ A which does not contain a nonempty and strictly smaller piece of cake – this is an atom, i.e., an undivisible piece of cake – must have zero valuation. Deﬁnition 2.4. Let A be an algebra over an abstract cake X and v be a ﬁnitely additive valuation. A set A ∈ A is an atom if v(A) > 0 and every B ⊆ A, B ∈ A, satisﬁes v(B) = αv(A) with α = 0 or α = 1. contains all intervals of type ha, bi, then all singletons {a} = [a, b] \ (a, b] are in A, and they are the only possible atoms. In this case, (D) entails that v does not charge single points: v({a}) = 0 for all a ∈ [0, 1]. This is the proof of the following lemma. Lemma 2.5. Let X = [0, 1] be a cake and A an algebra of admissible sets. Every additive valuation function v : A → [0, 1] that satisﬁes (D) is atom-free. In particular, if A ⊃ I(X) contains all intervals, then v({a}) = 0 for all a ∈ X. crucial for so-called moving-knife cake-cutting protocols to work. Deﬁnition 2.6. Let v : A → [0, 1] be a ﬁnitely additive valuation function on the algebra A = I(X) of ﬁnite unions of intervals from X = [0, 1]. F(1) = 1. Note that a continuous valuation function on I(X) cannot have atoms, as The continuity of v can also be cast in the following way: For all a and b with 0 ≤ a < b ≤ 1 satisfying v([0, a]) = α and v([0, b]) = β, and for every γ ∈ [α, β], there exists some c ∈ [a, b] such that v([0, c]) = γ. This explains the close connection between continuity and divisibility of v. In fact, assuming divisibility (D) of v, it can be shown that the distribution function is necessarily continuous. The following proof of this statement is inspired by (Schilling & Stoyan, 2016, Example 3.4). Clearly, (Σ) implies (A) – take A= A, A= B, and A= ∅ for i ≥ 3 – and (A) is The assumption that A is an algebra makes sure that we can indeed perform all of the Requirement (D) not only demands more from A but also from v. Speciﬁcally, (D) Clearly, a valuation v which enjoys property (D) cannot have atoms. If X = [0, 1] and A Quite often, we require valuation functions to satisfy continuity, a property that is valuation v. Since v is additive, F: X → [0, 1] is positive, monotonically increasing, and bounded by Lemma 2.7. Let v be an additive valuation for the standard cake X, where I(X) denotes the family of admissible pieces. If v is divisible, then the distribution function F = F continuous function with F (0) = 0. Proof. We have seen in Lemma 2.5 that a divisible additive valuation v has no atoms, so F (0) = v({0}) = 0. Since F is monotone and bounded, the one-sided limits F (t−) := lim F (t that F (t Pick an arbitrary J ∈ I(X) which is contained in I. Since J is a ﬁnite union of intervals, J diﬀers from its closure have v(J) = v( ε. If t v(J) = v( Hence, it is not possible to select a piece of cake J ∈ I(X) with J ⊆ I and v(J) = · v(I), Corollary 2.8. A ﬁnitely additive valuation v on I(X) is divisible if, and only if, its distribution function F extended to become and identiﬁed with a unique σ-additive measure that is deﬁned on a the Borel σ-algebra B(X); this is the smallest family of sets that contains all intervals and that is stable under complements and countable unions of its members. This enables us to evaluate sets in B(X) that are not ﬁnite unions of intervals, such as the Cantor set in Example 1.1. 2.2 Measure Theory: The Art of Dividing a Cake by Countably Many Cuts Up to now we have only allowed ﬁnitely many cuts when dividing the cake. But we may easily come into the situation where the number of cuts is not limited; not all protocols in the cake-cutting literature are ﬁnite. Thus we are led to consider unions of countably many pieces and the valuation of such countable unions, see also property (Σ) in Deﬁnition 2.2. To deal with such situations, measure theory provides the right tools. discussion of the cake-cutting literature. Our standard references for measure theory are the monographs by Schilling (2017) and Schilling and Kühn (2021), where also further background information can be found. F (s) and F (u+) := limF (s) exist for all t ∈ (0, 1] and u ∈ [0, 1). Assume that F is not continuous. Then there exists some t∈ X such that F(t−) < ) or F (t+) > F (t). If F (t) − F (t−) = ε > 0, then there exists some t< tsuch ) − F (t) ≤ε. Set I := (t, t] and observe that v(I) = F (t) − F (t) ∈ε,ε. We distinguish between two cases: If t∈¯J is not an isolated point, then v(J) = v(¯J) ≥ 6∈¯J or if t∈¯J is an isolated point, then we have due to v({t}) = 0 that If F (t+) − F (t) = ε > 0, a similar argument applies. Conversely, if the distribution function Fof a ﬁnitely additive valuation v deﬁned on We will see in the next section that every ﬁnitely additive, divisible valuation can be We will now introduce some basics from measure theory, which we need in the subsequent Deﬁnition 2.9. Let X be an arbitrary abstract cake. A subset A ⊆ P(X) is called a σalgebra over X if A is an algebra over X and, for all sequences (A countable union many sets is automatically a σ-algebra. On the other hand, P(X) is both an algebra and a σ-algebra, whereas the family I(X) is an algebra, but not a σ-algebra: For instance, the Cantor dust C smallest algebra containing all (ﬁnite unions of) intervals in X; thus it is natural to consider the smallest σ-algebra containing all (ﬁnite unions of) intervals in X. for any interval of X = [0, 1]. We denote by the family of all intervals within X. ing P. This can be a fairly complicated object and its existence is not really obvious. To get an idea as to why σ(P) makes sense, we note that P ⊆ P(X), that P(X) is a σ-algebra, and that the intersection of any number of σ-algebras is still a σ-algebra. Lemma 2.10. Let P denote any of the four families of open intervals, closed intervals, left-open intervals, or right-open intervals within X = [0, 1]. It holds that X is often used in connection with abstract cakes, which carry a topology, hence a family of open and of closed sets. The thus generated “topological” σ-algebra plays a special role and has a special name. Deﬁnition 2.11. We denote by B(X) the smallest σ-algebra on X containing all closed intervals from X and call it the Borel or topological σ-algebra over X. Deﬁnition 2.12. Let X be a cake and A a σ-algebra on X. A (positive) measure µ on X is a map µ: A → [0, ∞] satisfying that µ(∅) = 0 and µ is σ-additive. is additive, then σ-additivity is, in fact, a continuity requirement on µ, as it allows to interchange the limiting process in the inﬁnite union a limiting process in the sum. To wit: Let us return to the standard cake X = [0, 1]. Every algebra in X containing ﬁnitely To see that this is well-deﬁned, we need a bit more notation. Recall that ha, bi stands Moreover, if P ⊆ P(X) is any family, then σ(P) denotes the smallest σ-algebra contain- The next lemma is a standard result from measure theory. The fact that σ(Q(X)) coincides with the σ-algebra generated by all closed intervals in The following deﬁnition is well-known as well: It is useful to see a measure µ as a function deﬁned on the sets. If the set-function since all terms are positive, there is no convergence issue. Equivalently, we can state σadditivity as B or as C measures on the line (or on R A 7→ δ explain as to why the claim is incorrect but still sensible. Dirac Measure. Let a ∈ X be a ﬁxed point and set A 7→ δ a ∈ A or a /∈ A, respectively. This deﬁnition works for any A ⊆ X, and it is easy to see that this set-function is indeed a measure (in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.12 on the σ-algebra A = P(X) – or any smaller σ-algebra over X. f(x) δ understood in a distributional sense) a “function” such that “δ and This is best understood if we use X = [0, 1] and consider the distribution function: This is the Heaviside function δ a jump of size 1, and exploding diﬀerential quotient at x = a. If we compare Dirac measure with Lebesgue’s measure, the problem is that the support of δis a degenerate interval {a} = [a, a] of length zero, see below. Lebesgue Measure. The idea behind Lebesgue measure is to have a set-function A 7→ λ(A) in X (or in R or R particular, we want a volume that is additive and invariant under shifts and rotations. Thus it is natural to deﬁne for a simple set Q like an interval Q = (a, b] ⊂ X (or an n-dimensional “cube” Q = λ(Q) = b − a Invariance under shifts together with the σ-additivity (Σ) allow us to exhaust (“triangulate”) more complicated shapes like a circle with countably many disjoint sets (Q with A = is natural, as we exhaust a given shape by nontrivial sets Q Each of them contains a rational point q ∈ Q nonoverlapping Q sured”? Is the procedure unique? Is the process of measuring more complicated sets constructive? At this point we encounter a problem: General sets A ⊆ R to get a well-deﬁned and unique extension of λ from the rectangles to P(R n = 1 and for the standard cake X = [0, 1], the Cantor sets C already challenging, but the Vitali set from Example 1.2 shows that the cocktail of shift invariance and σ-additivity becomes toxic. ⊃ C⊃ C⊃ · · · ↓ C =C, then µ(C) ↓ µ(C) (for ﬁnite measures µ). Sometimes (and a bit provocatively) it is claimed that there are essentially only two (A), where x ∈ X is a ﬁxed point. Let us brieﬂy discuss these two extremes and Dirac’s measure is the derivative of the physicists’ “Delta function”: Indeed, the integral (dx) can be shown to yield f(a), which makes δ(x) :=δ(the derivative is δ(x) = 1” – the trouble being that δ(x) cannot be deﬁned pointwise for each x ∈ X. We call {a} the support of δsince, by deﬁnition, δcharges only sets such that {a} ⊆ A. There are immediate questions with this approach: Which types of sets can be “mea- (stated as Theorem 2.13 further down). This works as follows: In view of the σ-additivity property of λ, it makes sense to consider the σ-algebra A ⊆ P(R intervals (respectively, cubes). Thus we naturally arrive at the notion of the Borel σ-algebra as the canonical domain of Lebesgue measure. Unfortunately, there are so many Borel sets that we cannot build them constructively from rectangles – we would need transﬁnite induction for this – and this is one of the reasons why cutting a cake is not always a piece of cake. sense) is dimension-dependent. If n = 1 or n = 2, we can extend the notion of length and area to all sets, but not in a unique way. In dimension 3 and higher, we’ll end up with contradictory statements (such as the Banach–Tarski paradox ; see, e.g., Wagon, 1985) if we try to have a ﬁnitely additive geometric volume for all sets. This conundrum can be resolved by looking at the Borel sets or the Lebesgue sets – these are the Borel sets enriched by all subsets of Borel sets with Lebesgue measure zero. General Measures. Let us return to the assertion that λ and δ measures” on R Borel σ-algebra B(X) are of the form µ = µ for absolutely continuous, singular continuous, and discontinuous. This is best explained by looking at the distribution function F (x) = F continuous or discontinuous (with at most countably many discontinuities), accounting for the parts (µ two possibilities: F is either diﬀerentiable (F From Lebesgue’s diﬀerentiation theorem it is known that the points with “sc” or “d” must have Lebesgue measure zero. Thus, we ﬁnally arrive at the decomposition where x f(x) = homogeneous (this is the part with f(x)), contains “raisins” x some valuable dust which is fractal-like and divisible but not homogeneous. an algebra A to measures on the σ-algebra σ(A) generated by A. We state it only for the standard cake; the formulation for more abstract cakes is obvious. Theorem 2.13 (Carathéodory’s extension theorem). Let v be a valuation on X and denote by A the algebra of admissible pieces of cake. If v is additive and σ-additive relative to A, i.e., v satisﬁes (Σ), then there is a unique extension of v, deﬁned on σ(A), which is a σ-additive measure on σ(A). Let us brieﬂy discuss more general cakes than [0, 1]. In this section, X 6= ∅ will be a general set, A an algebra of admissible pieces, and σ(A) the σ-algebra generated by A. The The way out is the notion of measurable sets and Carathéodory’s extension theorem The question of whether every set A ⊆ Rhas a unique geometric volume (in the above Lebesgue’s decomposition theorem shows that all σ-additive measures µ on X with the , x, . . . are the at most countably many discontinuities (jump points) of F and F (x). Intuitively, this decomposition refers to a cake which, given a valuation µ is Let us close this section with the central result on the extension of valuations deﬁned on deﬁnition and the properties of a valuation v : A → [0, 1] (cf. Deﬁnition 2.2) still work in this general setting, but since X is abstract, there may not be (an equivalent of) a distribution function; this means that the connection between divisibility and σ-additivity, cf. Lemma 2.7 and Corollary 2.8, might fail in an abstract setting. Deﬁnition 2.14. A ﬁnitely additive valuation v on an abstract cake X and an algebra of admissible pieces A has the property (DD) if for every A ∈ A and α ∈ (0, 1), there is an increasing sequence of sets B sup and, because of σ-additivity, we see that v(B and (DD) are indeed equivalent for σ-additive valuations (or, in view of Corollary 2.8, for ﬁnitely additive valuations on the standard cake X = [0, 1] and A ⊃ I(X)). an atom. If A and B are atoms, then we have either v(A ∩ B) = 0 or v(A ∩ B) = v(A) = v(B) > 0; in the latter case, if v(A ∩ B) > 0, we call the atoms equivalent. If A and B are nonequivalent, then A and B \ A are still nonequivalent and disjoint. Iterating this procedure, we can always assume that countably many nonequivalent atoms (A disjoint: Just replace the atoms by A such that v(A) ≥ tion 2.14 which deﬁnes property (DD) with Deﬁnition 2.4 of an atom, it is clear that (DD) implies that v has no atoms. We will see in Theorem 2.16 that the converse implication holds as well. Deﬁnition 2.15. Let v be a ﬁnitely additive valuation on the algebra A over X. The valuation v is sliceable if for any ε > 0, there are ﬁnitely many disjoint sets B i = 1, . . . , n, n = n(ε), such that 0 < v(B vice versa, i.e., sliceability, atom-freeness, and property (DD) are pairwise equivalent for ﬁnitely additive valuations. Theorem 2.16. Let v be a ﬁnitely additive valuation on an algebra A over an abstract cake X. The conditions (DD), “v is sliceable,” and “v has no atoms” are pairwise equivalent. Proof. We start by showing that atom-freeness implies sliceability. Fix ε > 0. that v(B) > 0. Deﬁne We begin with a new deﬁnition of (D) for ﬁnitely additive valuations on abstract cakes. v(B) = αv(A). If v is a σ-additive valuation and A a σ-algebra, then B:=Bis again in A, We will also need the opposite of the property (DD); to this end, recall Deﬁnition 2.4 of Since v(X) = 1, a ﬁnitely additive valuation v can have at most n nonequivalent atoms A set B ∈ A is v-sliceable if the set-function A 7→ v(A ∩ B) is sliceable. We will now see that a sliceable ﬁnitely additive valuation enjoys property (DD), and Step 1: Let Y ⊆ X be any subset, and assume that there is some B ⊆ Y , B ∈ A, such Since B is not an atom, there is some F ⊆ B, F ∈ A, with 0 < v(F ) < v(B). If v(F ) ≤ ε, then F ∈ F, and we are done. Y ⊆ X; as usual, sup ∅ = 0. Since F c(X) < v(B that we pick of disjoint sets B in A, but we still have, because of (1), since the series converges. In particular, lim This completes the proof that v is sliceable. the “relative” ﬁnitely additive valuation v property from v, it is clearly enough to show that for every α ∈ (0, 1), there is an increasing sequence which is the property (DD) relative to the full cake X only. If v(F ) > ε, we assume, to the contrary that there is no subset F⊆ F , F∈ A, with ) ≤ ε. Since F cannot be an atom, there is a subset F⊆ F with ε < v(F) < v(F ) = F, F, F, . . . with v(F) > ε for all i ∈ N. This is impossible since v(F ) < ∞. So we Step 2: Deﬁne a(n obviously monotone) set-function c(Y ) := supv(C) for any If v(X \ B) ≤ ε, we set B:= X \ B; otherwise, we can pick some B∈ Fsuch c(X \ B) < v(B) ≤ ε. In general, if v(X \ (B∪ · · · ∪ B)) ≤ ε, we set B= X \ (B∪ · · · ∪ B); otherwise, We are done if this procedure stops after ﬁnitely many steps; otherwise, we get a sequenceS Using again the convergence of the seriesv(B), we ﬁnd some N = N(ε) such thatS v(B) ≤ ε, hence B, B, . . . , Band X \Bare the desired small pieces of X. We now show that sliceability implies condition (DD). Let B ∈ A with v(B) > 0. Since Since v is sliceable, there are mutually disjoint sets C, . . . , C∈ A, where N = N (n),S C, and v(C) <. Let k = b1/αc + 1. Set B:= C∪ · · · ∪ C, where M (k) ∈ {1, . . . , N(k)} is the dure, considering X \ B For B we need to have property (DD). we immediately get: Corollary 2.17. Let v be a σ-additive valuation on a σ-algebra A over an abstract cake X. The conditions (D), (DD), “v is sliceable,” and “v has no atoms” are pairwise equivalent. tion v, then A decomposition theorem. Corollary 2.18. Let v be a σ-additive valuation on a σ-algebra A over an abstract cake X. Then X can be written as a disjoint union of a v-sliceable set A many atoms A In the cake-cutting literature, a great variety of diﬀerent deﬁnitions have been used for the set P of admissible pieces of cake. We ﬁrst collect the most commonly used deﬁnitions for P, along with the corresponding references and discuss them in detail. Then we show several relations among these deﬁnitions and discuss what this implies for a most reasonable choice of P. are (i) all ﬁnite unions of intervals from X, i.e., the family I(X) deﬁned earlier on page 6; (ii) all countable unions of intervals from X, i.e., I(X) (iii) the Borel σ-algebra over X, i.e., B(X); (iv) the set of all Lebesgue-measurable sets over X, i.e., L(X); (v) the power set P(X) of X. By construction, α ≥ v(B) =v(C) > α −. Thus, we can iterate this proce- := B∪ D, we get α ≥ v(B) > α −. The sequence B, i ∈ N, satisﬁes v(B) ↑ α, i.e., B= Bis the sequence of sets As mentioned earlier, (DD) implies atom-freeness, which completes this proof. Since for a σ-additive valuation on a σ-algebra A, properties (D) and (DD) are equivalent, If A, A, . . . is an enumeration of the nonequivalent atoms of the σ-additive valua-S Typical choices for the set P containing all admissible pieces of a standard cake X = [0, 1] protocols. Such protocols can make only a ﬁnite number of cuts, thus producing a ﬁnite set of contiguous pieces, i.e., intervals, to be evaluated by the players. Authors that make this assumption and use P = I(X) include Woeginger and Sgall (2007), Stromquist (2008), Lindner and Rothe (2009), Procaccia (2009), Walsh (2011), Cohler, Lai, Parkes, and Procaccia (2011), Bei, Chen, Hua, Tao, and Yang (2012), Cechlárová and Pillárová (2012b), Brams, Feldman, Lai, Morgenstern, and Procaccia (2012), Cechlárová, Doboš, and Pillárová (2013), Chen, Lai, Parkes, and Procaccia (2013), Brânzei and Miltersen (2013), Aziz and Mackenzie (2016b, 2016a, 2020), Edmonds and Pruhs (2006), and Aziz and Mackenzie (2016a). done by Cechlárová and Pillárová (2012a) and Aumann and Dombb (2010). Even though the restriction to ﬁnite unions of intervals is sensible from a practical perspective, it may artiﬁcially constrain results that could hold also in a more general setting. intervals, i.e., I(X) Saberi (2009), and Segal-Halevi, Nitzan, Hassidim, and Aumann (2017). and Dombb (2011), and Robertson and Webb (1997). Additionally, several authors do not explicitly make the assumption P = L(X), but they deﬁne valuation functions based on (Lebesgue-)measurable sets only, most prominently, a valuation function is often deﬁned as the integral of a given probability density function on X. This or a similar assumption is made by Brams, Jones, and Klamler (2003, 2006, 2008, 2013), Robertson and Webb (1998), Webb (1997), Aumann, Dombb, and Hassidim (2013), Brânzei, Caragiannis, Kurokawa, and Procaccia (2016), and Caragiannis, Lai, and Procaccia (2011). Sgall and Woeginger (2007), Saberi and Wang (2009), Manabe and Okamoto (2010), and Aumann, Dombb, and Hassidim (2014). 1996b), Zeng (2000), and Brams and Taylor (1995a), deﬁne the set of admissible pieces of cake to be some (σ-)algebra (not necessarily Borel) over X. except I(X), are also σ-algebras over X. That I(X) is an algebra is shown in Lemma 4.4 below. However, I(X) now prove the strict inclusions among these sets stated in the following theorem. Theorem 3.1. I(X) Proof. We start with proving (a): I(X) ( I(X) every ﬁnite union of intervals is a countable union of intervals. To see that the two sets are not equal, look at I = is a countable union of intervals. However, it holds that I = [ cannot be written as a ﬁnite union of intervals, as all these subintervals are pairwise disjoint. Hence, I /∈ I(X), so I(X) ( I(X) Assuming P = I(X) is common among papers that consider only ﬁnite cake-cutting As a special case, valuation functions may even be restricted to single intervals, which is Brânzei, Procaccia, and Zhang (2013) extend P to contain countably inﬁnite unions of Authors assuming P = B(X) include Stromquist and Woodall (1985), Deng, Qi, and Works using P = L(X) include those by Reijnierse and Potters (1998), Arzi, Aumann, Papers that assume P = P(X) include those by Maccheroni and Marinacci (2003), Finally, several works, including those by Dubins and Spanier (1961), Barbanel (1996a, Note that each of the sets I(X), B(X), L(X), and P(X) is an algebra over X, and all, Having introduced all the diﬀerent approaches currently used in the literature, we will the family of all intervals within X. Since a σ-algebra is stable under (ﬁnite and countable) unions, we get I(X) ⊆ σ(Q(X)) = B(X). Using again the stability of a σ-algebra under countable unions, we arrive at I(X) intervals that each contain one element, it must hold that Q ∩ X ∈ B(X) by the deﬁnition of a σ-algebra. However, the irrational numbers Q ∩ X in X cannot be written as a countable union of intervals, since every interval containing more than one element immediately contains a rational number. Therefore, I(X) proving (b). However, there are Lebesgue-measurable sets that are not Borel-measurable: Observe that the cardinality of L(X) is the cardinality of P(X) (which is 2 continuum-many (i.e., c, the cardinality of X) Borel sets (see Schilling, 2017, Appendix G, Corollary G.7). This proves (c). An alternative direct construction can be based on the Cantor function, also known as the devil’s staircase (see Schilling & Kühn, 2021, p. 153, Example 7.20). Nevertheless, there are sets in P(X) that are not Lebesgue-measurable, for example the Vitali set that we introduced in Example 1.2, so L(X) 6= P(X), and we have (d). Taking P = I(X) as domain for a valuation v and a protocol involving a ﬁnite number of cuts is always possible. If we are open-ended or even inﬁnite, the naive choice P = I(X) is problematic, as I(X) requirements for P as described in the ﬁrst paragraph of Section 2.1. restrictive, especially in light of the fact that we also want to use inﬁnite cake-cutting protocols. Therefore, a larger set P may be desirable, perhaps even larger than I(X) which (as we have seen) has disqualiﬁed itself. provide arguments for a better option, namely the Borel σ-algebra P = B(X). If one boldly desires to deﬁne valuation functions on the set P(X) of all subsets of the cake, it remains to be shown that this indeed is possible. We have seen that the commonly used valuation functions represented via boxes, as depicted in Figure 2, are not capable of evaluating every piece of cake in P(X). Hence, in this section we aim to deﬁne a valuation function capable of evaluating every possible piece of cake in P(X). In Lemma 2.10 and Deﬁnition 2.11, we have seen that B(X) = σ(Q(X)) where Q(X) is Since, however, Q ∩ X ∈ B(X) is true, as Q ∩ X can be written as a countable union of The inclusion B(X) ⊆ L(X) holds by deﬁnition, as all Borel sets are Lebesgue-measurable. Finally, the power set P(X) trivially contains all other families of sets considered earlier. From a theoretical point of view, however, the choice P = I(X) may be unnecessarily We start our discussion by explicating why P = P(X) is a bad choice and we then Let us begin with a negative result. Using axiomatic set theory one can show that there cannot be a valuation v of the standard cake X = [0, 1] which This is the consequence of a result by Ulam, and it requires that the continuum hypothesis holds true, see the books by Oxtoby (1980, p. 26, Proposition 5.7) or Schilling and Kühn (2021, pp. 132–3, Example 6.15). all pieces of cake. Let us formally deﬁne a valuation function µ on P(X) satisfying the requirements (M), (A), and (D) from Deﬁnition 2.2. To do so, in a ﬁrst step, we must choose an arbitrary sequence (x deﬁne a mapping f where |B| denotes the cardinality of any set B. That is, f quency of the ﬁrst n elements of (x does exist, but it may not exist for other sets A. We can, however, use the Banach limits, that we will now introduce. We will need a nonconstructive way to extend linear maps. The key result is the standard Hahn–Banach theorem, which is well-known from functional analysis (see, e.g., Rudin, 1991, Theorem 3.2), so we need to go on a quick excursion into functional analysis. Theorem 4.1. Assume that (Y, k · k) is a normed vector space and L : M → R a linear functional, which is deﬁned on a linear subspace M ⊆ Y satisfying |Lx| ≤ κkxk for all x ∈ M with a universal constant κ = κ such that κ = κ (respectively, κkxk) by a general sublinear map p : Y → R. Sublinear means that p(αx) = αp(x) and p(x + y) ≤ p(x) + p(y) for all x, y ∈ Y and α ≥ 0. In this case, the extension of Lx ≤ p(x) satisﬁes −p(−x) ≤ it may happen that −p(−x) 6= p(x). of choice. {x = (x that (` • is deﬁned on all of P(X), • is divisible, hence satisﬁes v({x}) = 0 for any x ∈ X. This means that we should look for ﬁnitely additive valuations if we want to admit ˆL is again linear and satisﬁes |ˆLx| ≤ κkxk for all x ∈ Y with the same constant as before. With a little more eﬀort, but essentially the same proof, we can replace the norm kxk The proof is nonconstructive and, at least for nonseparable spaces Y , relies on the axiom We will use the Hahn–Banach theorem for the space of bounded sequences `([0, ∞)) = )⊂ [0, ∞) | kxk< ∞}, where kxk= supxis the uniform norm. Note ([0, ∞)), k · k) is a nonseparable space. mon to write c([0, ∞)) = {x ∈ ` lim sup Y = ` Using the addition to the Hahn–Banach theorem with p(x) := lim sup servation that lim we can choose the extension theorem, hence the axiom of choice. The appearance of these two concepts in this context is not an accident. The seminal paper of Banach (1923) (see also Banach, 1932, Chapter II.§1) proves what we now call the “Hahn–Banach extension theorem for linear functionals” in order to solve Lebesgue’s (1904, Chapter VII.ii) problème de la mésure which asks for the existence of an additive, or σ-additive, translation invariant measure on P(R on the dimension: In dimension n ≥ 3, it is always negative (because of the Banach–Tarski paradox), whereas in dimensions 1 and 2 it is negative if the measure is to be σ-additive (because of Vitali-type constructions, cf. Example 1.2). More on this can be found in the books by Wagon (1985, Chapter 10) and Schilling and Kühn (2021, Example 7.31). Lebesgue’s measure problem (this was discovered by von Neumann, 1929). Following M. M. Day, a group G which allows for ﬁnitely additive, (left-)translation invariant measures on all of P(G) is nowadays called amenable – a pun combining the actual meaning of the word (“nice, comfortable”) with its pronunciation which reminds of “mean value” or measure. The axiom of choice, which is needed for Hahn–Banach, can also be used to construct extensions of measures deﬁned on a sub-algebra A essentially, is equivalent to the Hahn–Banach theorem (cf. Wagon, 1985, Theorem 10.11 and Corollary 13.6) describing its axiomatic strength. Having deﬁned and discussed Banach limits, we will now use them to construct a valuation function property (A) from Deﬁnition 2.2 is satisﬁed. In the following lemma we show that µ satisﬁes property (D). At ﬁrst glance, this seems to contradict Corollary 2.8. But divisibility (D) involves the domain of the valuation, and the proof of the lemma shows that we have almost no control on the set A phenomenon is symptomatic for having a “too big domain.” A prime example of a bounded linear functional is the limit: Consider those x = )∈ `([0, ∞)) where L(x) := limx= x exists in the usual sense. It is com- ([0, ∞)), and we can extend it to all of Y as the Banach limit, i.e., The construction of Banach limits is a typical application of the Hahn–Banach extension There is a deep connection between the underlying group structure of the space Rand It is clear that µ(A) is additive since both the limit and the Banach limit are additive, so Lemma 4.2. For every A ∈ P(X) with µ(A) > 0 and every real number α ∈ [0, 1], there exists a subset A Proof. If µ(A) > 0 then A must contain an inﬁnite number of points of the underlying sequence, say A ∩ {x of integers. By assumption, A ∩ {x µ(A) = LIM such that LIM /n with k < n, we have i.e., the quantity f n +1 and the numerator does not increase, i.e., if i(m+ 1) > n+ 1 or if x and it increases if we jack up n → n + 1 and x and for α = 1, we use B = {x have are well-deﬁned and satisfy ` ﬁnishes the recursion, and we can deﬁne B = deﬁne A holds that µ(A which means that µ is not σ-additive. can interpret the sequence (x arbitrary pieces of the cake. However, there are multiple drawbacks. First of all, the existence of a Banach limit is only guaranteed if one is willing to accept the validity of The key observation in this proof is the fact that for any nonnegative rational number Fix α ∈ [0, 1] and observe that we can assume that 0 < α < 1: If α = 0, we take B = ∅, Since µ(A) = LIM|{x, . . . , x| i(m) ≤ n}| and 0 < α < 1 we must |{x, . . . , x| i(m) ≤ n(1)}| ≥ αµ(A) for some n(1) ∈ N. Deﬁne B= , . . . , x| i(m) ≤ n(1)}, and assume that we have already found a set Bsuch that (n) ≥ αµ(A). Because of the observation at the beginning of the proof, the numbers `:= min {k > n | f(k) ≤ αµ(A)} and u:= mink > `| f(k) ≥ αµ(A) for A= B∪ {x, . . . , x} By construction, |f(n) − αµ(A)| ≤ `holds for n > n(1), completing this proof. We now provide a counterexample that shows that µ is not σ-additive. To do so, we = X \ {x| i ∈ N} and A= {x} for i ∈ N. Obviously, for all j ∈ N ∪ {0}, it The valuation function µ deﬁned above may seem to be attractive for cake-cutting. We the axiom of choice, as already mentioned in Section 4.1.2. Furthermore, until now no explicit nontrivial example of a Banach limit is known. Hence, we cannot calculate µ(A) for A ∈ P(X) if the ordinary limit of f limit looks like. is actually not useful for our purposes. Besides the previously listed mathematical problems, there are also practical problems related to cake-cutting itself. If we would use µ as a valid valuation function in cake-cutting, all players would be obliged to precisely deﬁne a countable sequence (x for their valuation functions. When we think of common approaches and results in the cake-cutting literature, this approach seems impractical and not feasible to use. an open problem. Nonetheless, this section showed that deﬁning more complex valuation functions (compared to the valuation functions represented via boxes) does not solve our initial problem on P(X). Therefore, in the next section we discuss an alternative solution, namely, reducing P in size from P(X) to a smaller subfamily contained in P(X). We recommend to use P = B(X) as the most useful family of all admissible pieces of cake. As shown in Theorem 3.1, the Borel σ-algebra B(X) (strictly) contains I(X) as well as I(X) is not countable, as is the case for X = [0, 1] ⊂ R. In particular, one needs transﬁnite induction to “construct” all Borel sets. This means that, in general, we cannot construct a valuation µ on B(X) by explicitly assigning a value µ(A) to every element A ∈ B(X) nor give a recursive algorithm to construct µ(A), as the σ-algebra is simply too large. Instead, one can describe the valuation on a suitable generator of the σ-algebra and use Carathéodory’s extension theorem, stated previously as Theorem 2.13. I(X) and that I(X) is an algebra. In this case, we can use Carathéodory’s extension theorem to extend the valuation functions to measures on σ(I(X)) = B(X). Since the valuation functions are σ-ﬁnite, it follows that this extension is unique. Hence, by providing a box-based valuation function, we obtain a unique measure on B(X). Thus P = B(X) is a good solution to our problem. partitions the complete cake X into a ﬁnite number of pairwise disjoint subintervals, where each subinterval is allocated a ﬁnite number of boxes of equal height. We denote the set of all subintervals which µ uses by where denote by ψ Thus, although µ is theoretically capable of evaluating all pieces of cake in P = P(X), it Hence, ﬁnding practically usable valuation functions deﬁned on P(X) seems to remain , but is strictly smaller than L(X) and P(X). In general, the Borel σ-algebra can become quite large and complicated if the base set Let us show here that the box-based valuation functions are σ-additive valuations on Let us formalize the box-based valuation functions. A box-based valuation function µ denote by ψ Note that p(x) is a Borel-measurable function, which is a probability density, i.e., 1. Since µ is a Lebesgue measure with a weight, we cannot deﬁne it on all of P(X), but we may extend it easily onto B(X) using integration: Deﬁne µ: B(X) → [0, 1] as In particular, if B ∈ I(X) is a ﬁnite union of intervals in X, we see that for suitable n(B, i) ∈ N, and Example 4.3. Referring back to the box-based valuation function ν from Figure 2 on page 4, we obtain B = [0, Lemma 4.4. I(X) is an algebra over X. Proof. Obviously, it holds that ∅, X ∈ I(X). Now, let A, B ∈ I(X). Then we can write A = for appropriate J written as a ﬁnite union of pairwise distinct intervals. Lastly, A \ B ∈ I(X) holds by the same argument as before. Therefore, I(X) is an algebra over X. Also, we have ψ= 2, ψ= 1, ψ= 5, ψ= 2, ψ= 4, ψ= 3, and ψ= 17. For /6], we obtain Now, let us brieﬂy check the obvious fact that I(X) is an algebra over X. Iand B =I. Furthermore, we have us to use box-based valuation functions and their extensions as measures. It also enables us to use any Borel-measurable probability density – not only piecewise continuous densities – to deﬁne a divisible valuation function on B(X) which is an absolutely continuous probability measure with respect to Lebesgue measure. In this case, a further extension to L(X) is also possible, but the enrichment by subsets of Borel null sets (which are evaluated zero) has no additional beneﬁt. Among the questions we have tried to answer are: (i) Which subsets of [0, 1] should be considered as pieces of cake? Only ﬁnite unions of (ii) If valuation functions are considered as set-functions as studied in measure theory, A related interesting question is: While one can deﬁne the Dirac and counting measures for all sets in P(X), there is no way to deﬁne a geometrically sensible (and σ-additive [in dimensions one and two] or ﬁnitely additive [in all higher dimensions]) notion of “volume” for all sets – if we accept the validity of the axiom of choice. One can even show that the axiom of choice is equivalent to the existence of non-measurable sets (cf. Ciesielski, 1989, p. 55). valuation v on the standard cake X = [0, 1] (or indeed any one-dimensional cake) equipped with the algebra I(X) generated by the intervals, divisibility (D) is equivalent to atomfreeness or the continuity of the distribution function F For an abstract cake and a ﬁnitely additive valuation v, divisibility (D) should be replaced by Summing up, B(X) is recommended as a very good choice for P, since this choice enables intervals or more general sets? should they be σ-additive or only ﬁnitely additive? For the standard cake X = [0, 1], the natural choices are either divisibility (D) or absolute continuity with respect to Lebesgue measure. Obviously, absolute continuity implies continuity. There is a partial converse to this assertion: The notions of continuity and divisibility coincide (cf. Corollary 2.8) and the distribution function F(x) of a continuous valuation can be represented as a sum of the formR F(x) =f(t) dt+v([0, x]); this means that it has an absolutely continuous part and a continuous-singular part, see the discussion in the paragraph on “General Measures” following Deﬁnition 2.12. For an abstract cake, one should replace divisibility (D) by the notion of sliceability, which is equivalent to condition (DD) by Theorem 2.16, see Section 2.3 and Schilling and Stoyan (2016). Our ﬁndings result in concrete recommendations for cake-cutters. For a ﬁnitely additive sliceability (DD), which is equivalent to v being atom-free; if v is even σ-additive, conditions (D) and (DD) coincide, see Theorem 2.16 and Corollary 2.17. domains, say P = P(X): Even for the standard cake there are divisible, ﬁnitely additive but not σ-additive valuations, see Lemma 4.2. evant for the foundations of cake-cutting, for both the standard cake and abstract cakes, including the notions of σ-additivity, the Borel σ-algebra, and Carathéodory’s extension theorem (Theorem 2.13). We emphasized the importance of the Hahn–Banach theorem and the underlying axiom of choice if one needs to evaluate arbitrary pieces of cake which are not Borel or Lebesgue sets. might perhaps have appreciated the close connection between his work in measure theory and in cake-cutting. For future work, we suggest to study which implications our ﬁndings may have on existing or on yet-to-be-designed cake-cutting algorithms. and have identiﬁed the most commonly used choices of sets consisting of what is allowed as pieces of cake. After showing that these ﬁve most commonly used sets are distinct from each other, we have discussed them in comparison. In particular, we have argued that P(X) is too general to deﬁne a (practically or theoretically) useful valuation function on it. And ﬁnally, we have reasoned why we recommend the Borel σ-algebra B(X) as a very good choice and how to construct, using Carathéodory’s extension theorem, a measure on B(X) that cake-cutters can use to handle their box-based and even more general valuation functions. ﬁve points are important: 1. If one is interested in a ﬁxed number of players and a ﬁxed number of cuts, any additive 2. If the players take rounds and if the protocol is open-ended or inﬁnite, 3. If the valuation v on I(X) is divisible, measure theory guarantees that one is auto- All of this breaks down, however, if we consider ﬁnitely additive valuations on too big We have also discussed in detail the measure-theoretic notions and results that are rel- Banach, who can be seen as one of the founding fathers of the ﬁeld of cake-cutting, To conclude, we have surveyed the existing rich literature on cake-cutting algorithms For a pragmatic approach to cake-cutting on the standard cake X = [0, 1], the following valuation v deﬁned on the algebra of intervals I(X) will do. additivity of the valuation v needs to be strengthened to σ-additivity, and the domain of the valuation should contain the Borel σ-algebra B(X) – this is the smallest σalgebra containing I(X). matically in the situation described in item 2, i.e., the proper domain of (the extension of) v is the Borel σ-algebra B(X). 4. If one wants to extend the domain of the valuation v beyond B(X), things become 5. The tools provided by measure theory are powerful enough to handle even abstract We thank William S. Zwicker for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by DFG grants RO-1202/14-2, RO-1202/21-1 and SCHI-419/11-1, NCN 2018/31/G/ST1/02252 (DFG-NCN Beethoven Classic 3). The second author was a member of the PhD-programme “Online Participation,” supported by the North Rhine-Westphalian funding scheme “Forschungskollegs.” Example A.1 (Cantor dust; Cantor’s ternary set). Write the elements x ∈ [0, 1] of the cake X = [0, 1] as ternary numbers, i.e., in the form and consider the set C or “2” only. To enforce uniqueness, identify expressions of the form 0. ∗∗ ∗ 1000 . . . with 0. ∗∗∗ 0222 . . .. The set C [0, 1]: Take any x = 0.x an arbitrary element ˆx ∈ [0, 1]. “cream” pieces within the cake [0, 1], and imagine two players, taking turns in picking pieces of cake; for some reason (that their cardiologist elaborated on in detail) they have to avoid the cream altogether. For this, they are allowed to make two cuts, taking out an interval from the cake. between two cream pieces. From the triadic expansion, we see that, at each stage of the game, the maximum distance between two cream pieces is 0. ∗∗∗2 0. 0001 choices for the leading n − 1 digits denoted by the wildcard “∗∗∗” – to wit, the pieces taken diﬃcult: On the one hand, it is quite tricky to “construct” sensible valuations – unless we are happy with “rather simple” valuations like countable sums of point massesPP v =pδ,p= 1, (x)⊆ [0, 1], but these are obviously not divisible – and, on the other hand, they are not well-behaved, touching the very basis of axiomatic set theory. cakes. The set Cis the so-called Cantor set from Example 1.1. Think of its elements as The optimal strategy is to take, in each round, the largest (necessarily open) interval 000 . . . ' 3, and this situation appears exactly 2times, since we have 2 out are always the middle thirds of the largest remaining interval of cake: At the step marked (∗) Player 1 takes the ﬁrst middle third, at the (double) step marked (∗∗) Player 2 and then Player 1 take the middle thirds of the remaining intervals, etc. end up with the Cantor (ternary) set C If this procedure is repeated on and on, we remove countably many intervals from [0, 1] andT