Eﬃcient transportation of THz radiation over long distances (hundreds of meters) is a challenging problem. On one hand, the THz wavelength (say, 20–100 µm, for the range 3–15 THz), being smaller than microwaves, makes the scaled transverse dimensions of a traditional singlemoded waveguide impractically small over long distances. On the other hand, being larger than optical wavelengths makes the THz wave relatively more prone to Fresnel diﬀraction. An example of this challenge, which was the original motivator behind the present study, is the problem of eﬃciently transporting radiation from an “afterburner” THz linear undulator downstream of LCLS over a distance of 150–350 m, to reach the experimental halls at the LCLS facility, SLAC, Stanford [1, 2]. A traditional quasi-optical solution that utilizes a combination of planar, toroidal or paraboloidal mirrors to relay the THz beam in multiple steps is one proposed solution, which typically suﬀers from power loss of approximately 1% per mirror as well as some aberration and misalignment [1, 3]. To reach the near experimental hall at LCLS, for example, through a 150-m path (roughly 34 mirrors) going through the access maze at LCLS, the mirrors are estimated to incur around 30% power loss [1]. The iris-line structure, whose analysis is the subject of this paper, is an alternative solution that was ﬁrst proposed by Geloni, et al., [2] for the THz transport at LCLS. The iris line supports an attractive hybrid mode that can deliver (1) a low propagation loss, (2) an almost-Gaussian intensity proﬁle and (3) an invariant linear polarization across the iris. These features make it ideal for direct coupling with the radiation incident from the THz linear undulator. The iris-line geometry under consideration consists of a series of parallel screens, each having a circular iris (gap) of radius a and centered around the axis z, as shown in Figure 1. The periodic structure has a period b and iris radius a that are much larger (hundreds or throusands) of the THz wavelength in vacuum, λ, making the structure highly overmoded. The screens expand transversely to an outer radius r> a that deﬁnes the boundary of the enclosing chamber. The “virtual pipe” furnished by the irises along the axial (z) direction provides the resonant structure with a means to act as a waveguide (transmission line). On the other hand, the structure’s resonance conditions, controlled by the periodicity and the shape of the annular regions sandwiched between the screens, will constitute equivalent boundary conditions from the perspective of the waveguide. For a plane wave that is paraxially incident on the iris line (Figure 1), the Fresnel diﬀraction (or knife-edge diﬀraction) experienced at the screen edges will cause part of the wave to be lost into the shadow region between screens. For a single screen edge illuminated by a plane wave, this is similar to the well-known phenomenon of knife-edge obstruction (e.g. [4]), which causes the diﬀracted ﬁeld amplitude to decrease as we go deeper into the shadow (see Figure 2a) according to the atten- (a) dimensions, without the enclosing chamber at the outer radius. (b) A cross section in the iris line, showing dimensions and labeling. uation factor |F (ν)|, where F (ν) =edτ and ν is the Fresnel diﬀraction parameter deﬁned asp ν = h2(d+ d)/(λdd). Assuming that the screens are perfectly absorptive, all the diﬀracted waves entering the shadow will constitute lost power from the perspective of propagation along the axis. This can be equivalently modeled as an open-resonator structure, where we let the outer radius rgo to inﬁnity and the screens can be assumed to be perfectly absorptive or conductive; in either case the same diﬀraction mechanism is seen at the screen edges and none of the diﬀracted waves entering the shadow region will return to the line, as shown Figures 2b,c. Note that such an ideal open-resonator model (i.e. with r→∞) can be well approximated in practice by making the distance r−a ﬁnite but deep enough such that the power lost to diﬀraction is approximately equal to that lost in the limit r→∞. This is typically achieved by taking the depth r−a to be much larger than the√ diﬀraction scale ∼bλ, [5]. One way to analyze this open resonator is to consider the diﬀraction eﬀects between the screens equivalent to a complex impedance boundary condition at r = a and FIG. 2. (a) A canonical example of Fresnel diﬀraction of a plane wave caused by a single knife-edge obstruction (thin and absorptive screen). The ﬁeld strength of the wave traveling from point S to point P diminish according to the function |F (ν)| shown. As the point P moves deeper into the shadow region behind the screen, the attenuation is increased. Thep Fresnel parameter ν = h2(d+ d)/(λdd) deﬁning the depth of shadow (or clearance) is found geometrically from the dimensions shown. (b) A simpliﬁed illustration of rays lost to diﬀraction, as they hit an absorptive screen or get diﬀracted into the shadow region bound by two such screens. (c) A simpliﬁed illustration of rays lost to reﬂection or diﬀraction in the region between two conductive screens. thereby convert the problem into a boundary-value problem over the closed virtual pipe of radius r = a, [2]. Such a boundary condition has been called the Vainstein boundary condition [2, 6, 7] and provides one of the methods of analysis we shall use to describe the losses on the iris line. This method, however, assumes inﬁnitely-thin screens (δ = 0). In practice, the screens will have to be of ﬁnite thickness. Indeed, the ﬁnite thickness of the screen will be quite large relative to the wavelength at THz frequencies and a question is raised as to whether the screen thickness will inﬂuence the attractive features (low loss, invariant linear polarization and almost-Gaussian amplitude proﬁle) of propagation using the iris line, as predicted by Vainstein’s model. To address this question we analyze the open-resonator structure using the mode matching method and clustered (localized) ﬁeld expansions, for computational feasibility. For this type of overmoded open-resonator structures, it will be seen that the dominant power loss mechanism is due to diﬀraction or radiation loss, not ohmic (conductive) loss. This should be compared with smooth waveguides and traditional corrugated structures, typically found at microwave frequencies where the depth and period of corrugations are shallow and often ≤ λ/4 (e.g. [8–13]). For example, the dominant hybrid mode on the iris line will be shown to have the desirable property of the attenuation constant decreasing with increasing radius and increasing frequency, as a function of aω. The same property for the attenuation constant is found in smooth circular waveguides operating with the TE modes [8]. However, the attenuation on the iris line is mainly due to diﬀraction loss, while on the smooth circular waveguide is due to ohmic loss (by azimuthal surface currents) [8, 14]. Employing this iris line for THz radiation transport in practice will clearly require a study of not only its propagation power loss, polarization purity and amplitude proﬁle, but also of critical considerations such as correct mode launching and coupling, input transients, dispersion and tolerance to fabrication errors and mechanical misalignment. In this paper, we conﬁne our scope to the investigation of propagation loss, polarization and amplitude proﬁle properties, assuming screens of ﬁnite thickness and paraxial plane wave incidence (no electron beam on the line). The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we brieﬂy review the Vainstein-based model and use its predictions as a reference for comparison. We then proceed to Section III where we derive the vector ﬁeld equations for the dominant dipole mode of the iris line using the method of mode matching and clustered expansions. In Section IV we discuss the implementation of modematching and present its results for the speciﬁc example of the iris-line structure proposed for THz transport at LCLS, while investgiating the eﬀect of ﬁnite screen thickness on the propagation properties. The paper concludes in Section V, followed by two Appendices that contain more formal derivations. Appendix A presents the use of perturbation theory to formally derive the vector ﬁeld properties of the hybrid mode on the iris line starting from Vainstein’s model. Appendix B uses perturbation theory to provide a justiﬁcation for the use of the method of clustered ﬁeld expansions in the analysis of overmoded paraxial iris lines. Throughout this paper, we assume harmonic time dependence of the form e. The open-resonator model of the iris line can be converted to an equivalent closed resonator problem which consists of Vainstein’s approximate boundary condition at the cylindrical wall r = a. This boundary condition is formulated by Geloni, et al., in [2] as FIG. 3. Power loss for 150 m (to reach the Near Experimental Hall at LCLS) for the frequency range 3–15 THz, using an iris-line with a period of b = 30 cm and two iris radii (a = 5.5 or 10 cm). This prediction is based on the Vainsteinmodel and assumes zero screen thickness. The larger radius is recommended for lower loss, if mechanically feasible. whereˆβ= 0.824, M = 1/8πNwith N= a/(bλ) being the Fresnel number, and E represents the electric ﬁeld envelope components Eor Ein the cylindrical frame of coordinates (r, θ, z). This analytical model assumes that the parameter M is small (M  1) and that the structure is highly-oversized compared to the wavelength, with kb  1, where k= 2π/λis the wavenumber in free-space. Solving the Helmholtz wave equation while imposing the boundary condition (1) results in a dominant hybrid mode with invariant linear polarization across the iris, an amplitude proﬁle approximately equal to the Bessel function J(2.4r/a), and the following propagation power loss (L) law (see Appendix A for derivations) where c is the speed of light in vacuum, ω is the angular frequency and z is the distance travelled down the line. A key feature of this loss law is the tendency of the attenuation constant Im[β] to drop with larger radii and frequencies (inversely proportional to aand ω), where β is the complex propagation constant along the z direction. An iris line with dimensions a = 5.5 cm and b = 30 cm, for example, has been proposed [2] for the THz radiation transport at LCLS. Using the power loss estimation (2), we see that a THz undulator radiation in the range 3–15 THz will experience maximum propagation loss of 14% at 3 THz. The loss decreases at higher frequencies, as shown in Figure 3. If larger radii are feasible for installation at LCLS, lower loss can be achieved by exploiting the cubic-law dependence of loss on radius a. For example, Figure 3 shows a second iris line with a = 10 cm, and a power loss less than 3% at 3 THz. The predictions given by (2) do not take into account the eﬀect of ﬁnite screen thickness (δ > 0). In Section III, we analyse the modal ﬁelds on the line for nonzero screen FIG. 4. Regions of analysis for the open-resonator model, shown over the cross section for one period (gap) in the irisline structure. thicknesses and compare the results with those predicted by Vainstein’s model. In this analysis we begin by expanding the modal ﬁelds in the axial region (region 1 in Figure 4) and the annular region (region 2 in Figure 4), then impose the boundary conditions at r = a and derive the structure’s characteristic dispersion relation (k–β) in matrix form. Solving the characteristic equation for a given wavenumber k= ω/c will then yield the complex propagation constant β on the iris-line. The presented approach is similar to the classical treatment given by Zotter and Bane [15] in terms of matrix equation conditioning. However, the present treatment is diﬀerent from [15] in that it is concerned with the analysis of an open (r→∞), rather than closed, resonator model and in that we derive all the ﬁeld components directly using the longitudinal components (E, H) of the ﬁelds themselves, rather than the Hertz potentials. Recall from Whittaker’s theorem [16, 17], that only two independent solutions of the scalar wave equation are needed to determine all the 6 components of the EM ﬁeld in vacuum. The two approaches are therefore fundamentally equivalent. A. Field expansion in the axial region (region 1) Starting with Maxwell’s curl equations, ∇×E = iωµH and ∇×H = −iωE, and seeking wave solutions that are travelling along z in the form e, we can rewrite these curl equations with all the vectors and the operator ∇ divided into their axial (along z) and transversal (subscripted with t) parts, as (∇+ iβˆz) × (E+ E× ˆz) = iωµ(H+ Hˆz), (3) (∇+ iβˆz) × (H+ H× ˆz) = −iω(E+ Eˆz). (4) For a transverse electric (TE) mode, we substitute E= 0 into (3) and (4) and equate vector terms that are parallel to each other on each side of the equations. After algebraic vector manipulation, we obtain H=βωµˆz ×E, ∇× E= iωµHˆz, ∇× H= 0,(5) For a transverse magnetic (TM) mode (H= 0), we similarly ﬁnd E= −βωˆz ×H, ∇× H= −iωEˆz, ∇× E= 0,(7) If the boundary conditions of a given structure provide a form of coupling (impedance) that links the TE and TM modes, a hybrid mode is generally produced as a combination of the TE and TM modes, with Consider now our iris-line structure and the ﬁeld description for region 1, which must generally meet the hybrid mode equations (9) and (10), as well as the scalar transverse Helmholtz equations, ∇E+ kE= 0 andp ∇H+ kH= 0, where k=k− βis the transverse wavenumber. Since both the Helmholtz equation and the present boundary conditions are separable in cylindrical coordinates [18], we can immediately assume that Eand Hare of the form E= CR(r)Θ(θ)Z(z) and H= DˆR(r)ˆΘ(θ)ˆZ(z), where C and D are arbitrary constants. We ﬁnd the form of the functions R(r), Θ(θ) and Z(z) that constitute Eas follows (with a similar treatment for H). Given the periodicity of the structure, Z(z) is predicted by Floquet’s theorem to have the form of a Bloch wave [19, 20], whose ﬁeld will be periodic from one structural period to the next, except for a complex phase advance of e, where βis the propagation constant along z. Note that βis generally complex to allow for attenuation in lossy structures (as in our iris-line structure), but would be real when the structure exhibit no losses to materials or radiation (i.e. closed structure with perfectly conducting walls and perfect dielectrics) [20]. We can therefore write Z(z) as Z(z) = eφ(z), where φ(z) is a periodic function of fundamental period b. Expanding φ(z) as a spacialP Fourier series,Ce, leads to where βis the propagation constant and k=p k− βis the transverse wavenumber for the nspacial harmonic. As in (9) and (10), the transverse components of the nharmonic can be found from its E, H components as To ﬁnd the radial and azimuthal dependences, R and Θ, we now write the Helmholtz equation ∇E+ kE= 0 in cylindrical coordinates. Since the trans- verse Laplacian operator [∇≡r+] in such coordinates couples the radial and azimuthal components without coupling the axial component, the Z(z) function drops out of the equation and we end up with the following equation, after separating the variables, where m is a constant integer (to keep the azimuthal dependence a single-valued function of θ). This gives where J[·] denotes the derivative of J[·] with respect to its argument. Note that these equations will be further normalized following mode-matching in Section III C, to provide symmetry and convenience during calculation. azimuthal dependence Θ in the form of cos mθ or sin mθ. With no loss of generality, we use the former for Eand the latter for H, since the azimuthal dependenceˆΘ in Hwill turn out (as it must) to be of the same form. We also anticipate that m will be the same across region 1 and 2, to maintain phase matching and as it does not depend on n; we hence reuse the same symbol m in both regions. The radial dependence is now seen to reduce to which is the parameterized Bessel equation. Since the radius in region 1 is bounded by the iris radius (r ≤ a) and includes the axis (r = 0), we choose our solution to be the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind, J(kr), and reject the second kind. With a similar treatment for H, we now have where, for symmetry, we have chosen to give C and D the same physical dimensions and explicitly isolate thep free-space impedance, Z=µ/. We now substitute (16) and (17) into (12) and (13) to yield, after algebraic manipulation, the hybrid ﬁeld expressions for region 1, B. Field expansion in the annular region (region 2) Since the ﬁeld propagation in region 1 will vary periodically along z with the same fundamental period as the structure’s, we know that the ﬁeld in one annular gap will be the same as that in all gaps. Therefore, we merely need to solve for one gap. Since the gap is bounded in the z direction and open in the r direction, we expect it to host a standing wave along the longitudinal direction and a traveling wave in the radial direction (radiating outwards). The latter is expected to meet the usual radiation boundary condition (E, H → 0) at inﬁnity. For the ﬁelds E, Hin the gap, we also expect to superimpose solutions of the form ein order to form the standing waves. These ﬁelds must satisfy the transverse Helmholtz wave equations, ∇E+ kE= 0q and ∇H+ kH= 0, where k=k− βand the index p denotes a given mode (standing wave) in region 2. Since both the Helmholtz equation and the structure’s boundary conditions in region 2 are separable in the cylindrical frame [18], we follow a treatment similar to the one used above for region 1 and we assume that E= AR(r)Θ(θ)Z(z) and H= BˆR(r)ˆΘ(θ)ˆZ(z), where A, B are arbitrary constants. For the pTE mode, considering that Hmust have nodes at the screen walls (see Figure 4), thenˆZ(z) must be of the formˆZ(z) = sin β(z + ∆) =[e− e], where β= pπ/(2∆). Similarly, for the p TM mode, considering that Emust have maxima at the screen walls, Z(z) must be of the form Z(z) = cos β(z + ∆) =[e+ e]. We now note that equations (9) and (10), which related the transverse components to the longitudinal ﬁelds (E, H), were originally derived for a travelling wave (waveguide setup) rather than a standing wave (gap setup), and will need to be adjusted accordingly. For the TE (E= 0) case, we now need to take ∂/∂z ≡ iβfor the eterm and ∂/∂z ≡ −iβfor the eterm; and similarly for the TM mode. Repeating the derivation steps taken for region 1 by separating Maxwell’s curl equations in terms of the longitudinal and transverse parts for the p mode, followed by algebraic vector manipulation, gives the following relations for the TE mode E= Biωµksin β(z + ∆)∇ˆR(r)ˆΘ(θ)× ˆz.(26) H= −Aiωkcos β(z + ∆)∇[R(r)Θ(θ)] × ˆz.(29) To ﬁnd the radial and azimuthal functions (R, Θ) in this region, we substitute into the Helmholtz equation and use the cylindrical Laplacian, as was done in region 1. This leads to the same azimuthal dependence (namely, cos mθ or sin mθ) and the same parameterized Bessel equation (15). For its Bessel solutions in region 2, we pick the Hankel function of the ﬁrst kind, H(kr), since here we have an outwardly travelling wave and since, for a time dependence e, the second kind Hankel would represent inward travel (with a similar treatment for the TM mode). The nature of the travelling wave implied can be easily revealed by writing down the deﬁnition of Hat large distances [21], viz. Substituting the R, Θ,ˆR,ˆΘ forms back into equations (24)–(29), we can now explicitly write the full hybrid ﬁeld expressions for region 2 as where B= 0. Note that, for symmetry in equations and parameters, we take the impedance Zexplicitly out of the Bcoeﬃcients. These equations will be further normalized following mode-matching in Section III C, to provide symmetry and convenience during calculation. It is important to bear in mind that the ﬁelds (31)–(36) are givens for |z| ≤ ∆ inside the gap and are identically 0 in the region ∆ < |z| ≤ ∆ + δ/2, where the screens are assumed to be made of a perfect conductor (see Figure 4). Multiplying both sides by eand integratingR through, using integration by parts twice, this yields (after manipulation and abbreviating the obvious We now solve for the coeﬃcient families (A, B) and (C, D) by enforcing the continuity of the tangential E and H ﬁelds across the boundary r = a (the continuity of the normal ﬁelds follows automatically from Maxwell’s divergence equations). Namely, we require the four conditions at r = a (ka), for |z| ≤ ∆ Bessel argument) equations (39) and (40) below. Following similar steps, we enforce the second, third and fourth conditions, using integration by parts twice for each case, to also get equations (41)–(43). −i2βsin β(39) − β)−i cos β∆, for odd p, sin β(41) −i cos β∆, for odd p, sin β )i cos β∆, for odd p,(42) 2βsin β(43) ∆(β− β)i cos β∆, for odd p, where the dagger symbol represents Hermitian conjugation and δis Kronecker’s delta (equal to 1 when p = 0 and zero otherwise). Note that M and N will denote matrices that contain elements such as Mor N. Further simpliﬁcation and symmetry in the equations are achieved if we momentarily deﬁne B≡ iBand remove the imaginary i factor from odd cases in the M, N matrices by absorbing it into the corresponding¯A,¯B coeﬃcients, calling the new matrixed¯M,¯N, as follows ¯M=2βsin β∆, for even p(46) ¯N=2βsin β∆, for even p(47) This would render the equations real, since the and convenience, we also normalize the coeﬃcients as Aand H(ka)B→ B, which is equivalent to dividing the original mode equations in (18) and (31) by J(ka) for all the Bessel terms and their derivatives, whilst dividing by Hfor all the Hankel terms and their derivatives. Eﬀecting this normalization gives us the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations in region 1 and 2 as follows (noting that B= 0) Using matrix conditioning and reduction steps similar to those used in [15], we now take the following deﬁnitions to simplify our equations, where all the matrices in (60)–(64) are diagonal (either in p or in n) and, therefore, easy to manipulate. The modal equations can now be written concisely as In full matrix notation we can cast this into where¯A,¯B, C, D are vector matrices,¯N,¯M are full real matrices and the remaining matrices are diagonal. We can further write this system of equations in terms of “matrices of matrices” as follows where 1 and 0 here represent the unity and zero matrices. We can solve these equations to eliminate the¯A,¯B pair. After manipulation, we obtain By appropriate grouping of the matrices in this homogeneous result we can ﬁnally write the system’s characteristic equation explicitly in symmetric form as whose determinant must vanish to give the eigensolutions and the dispersion relation between ω and β, after we truncate the p sum to some index Pand the n sum to ±Nin practice (remembering that the index n runs in region 1, whilst the index p runs in region 2). Speciﬁcally, we require that M=sin β−i cos β∆, for odd p(83) N=sin β−i cos β∆, for odd p(84) Solving (77) numerically for a given frequency or wavenumber k= ω/c will produce the sought complex propagation constant βof the iris-line, whose real part Re[β] will represent the longitudinal phase constant and imaginary part Im[β] the longitudinal attenuation constant. Once we have found β, we can write the full ﬁelds by substituting into (48)–(59). The mode-matching model obtained above is now ready for numerical implementation on a computer. Our investigation of the iris line is concerned not only in comparing the numerical results with the predictions of the model based on Vainstein’s boundary condition, but also observing the inﬂuence of ﬁnite-screen thickness on the attractive characteristics (propagation loss, polarization and amplitude proﬁle) of the dominant mode. For the open iris-line structure in hand, we expect radiation loss and the paraxial propagation (similar to a plane wave, but with slightly bent, paraboloidal wavefronts [22]) to contribute, respectively, by giving a nonzero imaginary part of βand a real part that is close but not exactly equal to k[see equation (B9) in Appendix B for a more formal description]. Assuming an incident THz wave with linear polarization, we are mainly interested in the dominant dipole mode on the iris line that can couple to and support such a wave. The basic aim of the numerical code is therefore to ﬁnd the zeros of the determinant (77) for a ﬁeld with m = 1, which would give us β= Re[β]+iIm[β]. Given the periodicity of the dispersion curves in such a system, there will be an inﬁnite number of possible solutions. The dominant mode will naturally be the one with the lowest attenuation constant (smallest Im[β]). Given the homogeneous equation (76) of the C, Dﬁeld coeﬃcients, our requirement for the determinant of this matrix to vanish is basically a requirement to ﬁnd a value of β that gives nontrivial ﬁeld solutions. Substituting such a βback in to the matrix will thus lower its rank and link the ﬁeld coeﬃcients C, Dto each other, informing us about the “shape” (or proﬁle) of the dominant vector ﬁeld distribution. Solving this in practice using standard computer tools, such as Wolfram Mathematica (v.12.3.0), can be formulated as an eigenvalue problem. Indeed, the characteristic matrix (76) and [C, D]vector can be written in shorthand notation as Ax = 0, where A denotes the matrix (76), x the [C, D]vector, and the superscript T denotes taking the transpose. Then solving the homogeneous equation Ax = 0 is equivalent to solving the eigenequation Au = λu to ﬁnd the eigenvector u that corresponds to the zero eigenvalue (i.e. if λ= 0, then x ≡ u). Taking the Cand Dcoeﬃcients from this eigenvector and subtituting them, alongside β, into (48)–(59) will then allow us to visualize the vector ﬁeld polarization and proﬁle, as will be shown in Subsection IV C. In the following subsections, we discuss the various aspects related to physical interpretation and practical implementation of the mode-matching method. For numerical implementation, one clearly needs to truncate the inﬁnite series in the n and p expansions seen in (48)–(59). Ideally, the expansion in n would bePP the value of Pis customarily chosen close to 2N (to facilitate matching both expansions across boundary, assuming thin screens) and both are high enough to allow for the solution to numerically settle at a given accuracy. Indeed, the value of Pcan be estimated by intuitively considering how the ﬁeld in region 2 is excited by the wave incident in region 1. Since we assume paraxial incidence (β≈ k) from the THz source along the z axis, and since the proposed structure is highly overmoded, with each period b in the order of ∼3000 wavelengths, the longitudinal (guided) wavelength will roughly be equal to its value in free-space ∼λ= ω/c. When this wave is matching tangentially across the boundary (r = a) to- FIG. 5. A qualitative sketch demonstrating the eﬀect of iris loading on an otherwise-smooth pipe as the depth of iris loading (added admittance) is changed. In this sketch βis assumed to be real (no loss). For a smooth pipe, the continuous parabola (green) is observed, where phase velocity v ≥ c and k≥ βfor propagating modes, asymptotically leading to the limit of TEM propagation at the 45-deg line. As we start loading the pipe with shallow (weak) irises, the propagated modes are allowed in certain passbands, attenuated in stopbands, and the dispersion curves (red) become periodic in β, with every side lobe period (index n) now corresponding to a Fourier harmonic bin, where β= β+ 2πn/b. This allows for slow and fast waves to propagate (depending on the used harmonic). If the irises are gradually removed, the passband curves (red) expand and coalesce back into the parabolic curves of the smooth pipe (green) [20]. If the iris loading increases, the passbands (blue) are compressed, and in the limit they become ﬂat spectral lines, with wider stopbands in-between. Since our structure is highly overmoded with a paraxial incidence, we eﬀectively operate in the perturbation region (purple shade) in the vicinity of the parabolic curve and make our choice for the n = 0 harmonic band accordingly; see the simpliﬁed example of point (β, k) on the ﬁgure. wards region 2, whose width is 2∆ (see Figure 4), we expect the excitation of the mode whose longitudinal standing-wave in region 2 has a half-wavelength value close to the value of ∼λ/2. This implies that the dominant mode number (call it p = P) in region 2 will be approximately the integer closest to. This, indeed, turns out to be the case, as can be observed through numerical computations. The modes in region 2, however, can be categorized, as in traditional smooth waveguides, to either propagating or evanescent modes. The former happens when k> β (giving real k, with phase velocity v > c and H(kr) Hankel function radiation), while the latter corresponds to k< β(giving purely imaginary k= iγ, where γis a real number, with v < c and K(γr) modiﬁed Bessel function radiation). The dispersion curve of such a waveguide takes the usual form of a parabola that is entirely above the 45-deg line (speed of light line), asymptotically approaching it from above in the high-frequency limit; see Figure 5. Therefore, the integer Pclosest to must actually be chosen as the ﬂoor integer (i.e. the closest integer from below) to represent a propagating mode (radiation) in region 2. Such a mode will typically be responsible for most of the attenuation seen in Im[β]. If the ceiling integer was chosen instead, it would correspond to the largest evanescent mode. Therefore, in our implementation and throughout the results below Pwill refer to the ﬂoor integer of=. The choice of Palso serves as a natural midpoint around which we may choose to “cluster” (or localize)P our p expansion, so that, instead of summing over,P we sum over, where we choose pSteps during numerical implementation. A tradeoﬀ clearly exists between higher accuracy of the results (higher pSteps) and the computational burden (time and memory) required to perform the calculation. Our choice to use, or not use, clustering will depend on how overmoded a structure is and how diﬃcult it is to run a regular expansion (without clustering). Note that a regular expansionPP is equivalent to a clustered expansion, if pSteps happened to be equal to Pand Phappened to be equal to 2P. Moreover, if a regular expansion up to Pstopped short of reaching P(that is, if P< P), no correct solution will be found, because the dominant mode would not be included. This highlights the usefulness of clustered expansion when we can only expand in a limited number of terms (e.g. due to computational limitations), since the clustered expansion will always include the dominant mode; see Figure 6. A similar concept can be used to cluster the n expansion around the dominant harmonic, which is the closest (rounded) integer (call it n = N) to the expected value . Unlike P, there is no need to seek the ﬂoor or ceiling integer values for N. Furthermore, we also need to include the Fourier image of the dominant harmonic. At this point, we are faced with a question as to where to look for the value of βon the dispersion curves, when such curves are periodic in β= β+ 2πn/b? (see Figure 5). The periodicity naturally implies that all harmonic bins (lobes) are equivalent and we can choose to designate the index n = 0 to any of them. However, since our structure is a highly-overmoded structure with a paraxial wavefront that can be considered a small perturbation compared to the TEM limit on the dispersion diagram, the dispersion curves forming the passbands in Figure 5 will be in the vicinity of the parabolic curve of a smooth waveguide (small iris-loading eﬀect). Indeed, in the limit of no iris loading (no diﬀraction losses), these passbands coalesce back to give the parabolic curve [20]. FIG. 6. (a) A clustered expansion in n, taking the paraxial dominant harmonic (in red) to be the basic harmonic (β= β) at n = 0, which corresponds to approximately Nwavelengths per structure period, where Nis the nearest integer to b/λ. This means that the image of the dominant harmonic is at the index n = −2N(in red). Note that thePP expansion is equivalent to+, where we choose nSteps. (b) A regular versus clustered expansion in p, where the dominant mode in region 2 (excited by the paraxial incidence in region 1) happens at index p = P, where Pis the ﬂoor integer nearest to 2∆/(λ/2) from below (i.e. number of half-wavelengths in the width 2∆). The regu-P lar expansion here is, and the clustered expansion isP For a perturbative iris eﬀect, the dominant harmonic is expected to be near the corresponding (k, β) point on the parabolic curve in Figure 5. Consequently, we choose n = 0 to be the index for the dominant mode corresponding to β= β≈ k, which is equivalent to N≈ b/λharmonic bins away from zero on the βaxis. The Fourier image of the dominant mode will hence be at n = −2N, and a clustering of the formPP computations. The advantage of working around a dominant mode that is slightly perturbed (i.e. clustering the ﬁeld expansion) seems to, in some sense, oﬀset the computational disadvantage of operating with such a highly-overmoded structure. Had the iris loading been too strong [e.g. small Fresnel number N= a/(bλ)], more wave reﬂections between the irises would have resulted in several strong harmonic terms, which are not necessarily the original one near the parabolic curve (the periodic dispersion curves in Figure 5 would be relatively ﬂattened) and a preferred designation for the n = 0 harmonic bin would no longer be clear. Good discussions on the interpretation of the n harmonic bins and the limiting cases can be found in references [20] and [11]. The discussion above introduces the method of clustering in light of its intuitive nature in practice and the behavior infered from the k− β dispersion curves. A more formal justiﬁcation for using clustering in highly- TABLE I. The three diﬀerent scales considered during the present analysis: mildly-overmoded (Scale-1), overmoded (Scale-2) and highly-overmoded (Scale-3). Scale-3 is the structure proposed for the LCLS THz transport problem. For each scale, Nindicates the structure period (b) measured in wavelengths, N=a/(bλ) is the Fresnel number and the values given for screen-thickness δ are example values to indicate the scaling. All shown dimensions are in mm. overmoded paraxial lines is provided in Appendix B, for completeness. Since the iris-line dimensions (a, b) under consideration are in the order of hundreds or thousands of wavelengths at THz frequencies, making the line highly overmoded, the computational cost experienced for mode-matching analysis and iterative optimization can be prohibitively high. To help develop our understanding of overmoded iris-line structures and to help optimize our numerical algorithms, we utilize the clustering method where possible and we solve the problem over 3 scales. While keeping the aspect ratios ﬁxed, each scale represents a similar structure with dimensions scaled 10-times relative to those of the next scale. Scale-1 dimensions are 100-times smaller than our intended structure (thus, 100 times less overmoded), Scale-2 is 10-times smaller than our intended structure, and Scale-3 is our intended structure; see Table I. All scales are analyzed at the same frequency of 3 THz. Clearly, solving the Scales 1 and 2 are less computationally prohibitive than Scale-3, where the structure period span thousands of wavelengths. Working over scales will also allow us to spot diﬀerent behavior trends as the scale moves from mildly-overmoded to highly-overmoded, as will be reported in Subsection IV C. When validating Vainstein’s model using mode-matching, it is important to keep an eye on the small parameter M and the number kb in each scale, since Vainstein’s model assumes M  1 and kb  1, which imply a better validity in highly-overmoded structures. Thus, Scale-3 is expected to have stronger relevance to the predictions by Vainstein’s model, compared to Scale-1 and Scale-2. The results of mode-matching calculations are summarized in Table II for the three scales of the iris line listed in Table I. In addition to comparing the mode- TABLE II. Results from the mode-matching model for each scale, listing the corresponding Vainstein-based prediction (for δ = 0) for comparison and showing the inﬂuence of screen thickness. Note that the validity of the Vainstein predictions is better for M  1 and kb  1. The indicated values for P, pSteps and nSteps are given for the case with δ = 0. The values of pSteps/nSteps are given in brackets under the Scale name in each heading. Note that ∆Im[β]/Im[β] here denotes the change in the imaginary part of βrelative to its value for zero-thickness screens. The values of β, kare given in 1/m, while a, b, λand δ are given in mm. matching prediction with the Vainstein-based predictions for δ = 0 screens, the table shows the eﬀect of increased screen thickness (varying δ) on the attenuation constant (Im[β]), for the diﬀerent scales. Following an iterative process, the solution was computed for a given pSteps/nSteps choice, then re-computed for graduallyincreased values of pSteps and nSteps in each iteration, until settlement is reached with less than ∼0.5% FIG. 7. Eﬀect of varying screen thickness δ from zero to ∼ b/10 (that is 0.0–30.0 mm) on Im[β], for the Scale-3 structure with period b = 333.33 mm, calculated at pSteps/nSteps = 6666/3333. Selected points on the curve give explicit value of δ in mm. See data in Table II for details. TABLE III. Propagation power loss at 3 THz for the iris line with b = 30 cm, two options of radius a, and over 150 m or 350 m transport distance. For LCLS, these are approximately the distances to the Near Experimental Halls (NEH) and Far Experimental Hall (FEH), respectively. The values are estimated using Vainstein’s model after adjustment for screen thickness (assuming ∆Im[β]/Im[β]∼=− 33.9%). error. Table II indicates the smallest pSteps/nSteps values found for numerical settlement in each scale. Figures 7 and 8 show how the attenuation loss constant is changing for the full-scale (Scale-3) structure as well as the two smaller scales. It is noted from Figure 8 that the full-scale structure (Scale-3) will have 33.9% reduction in the attenuation constant Im[β] for a screen that is 2-mm thick. The change is less acute for Scale-2 structures around equivalent relative-thickness points (δ/b). Scale-1 exhibits some oscillatory behavior for Im[β] as a function of δ for relatively thin screens, before it settles in value for thicker screens. This may be attributed to the small Fresnel number of Scale-1, eﬀectively taking the structure from the perturbative diﬀraction limit into stronger iris loading (admittance) where more harmonic terms experience stronger reﬂections and can interfere constructively and destructively, as implied by Figure 5. Note that, for zero thickness screens, the predictions by the Vainstein-based model for Im[β] deviate from those found numerically by about ∼100% for Scale-1 FIG. 8. Eﬀect of varying screen thickness δ from zero to ∼ b/10 on Im[β], for the three scales discussed above, shown together on the same ﬁgure for comparison. Selected points on the curve give explicit value of δ in mm. See data in Table II for details. (M = 0.2), ∼52% for Scale-2 (M = 0.07) and ∼17% for Scale-3 (M = 0.02). Clearly, the agreement is better in the limit of small M (highly-diﬀractive/overmoded structure, with large Frensel number) where Vainstein’s model is expected to increasingly hold. Within this validity limit, one may use the Vainstein-model for a quick ﬁrst approximation of propagation loss and then add a correction to account for screen thickness eﬀect, as predicted by the presented mode-matching results. For example, at 3 THz, the iris line originally proposed by reference [2] for LCLS (with a = 5.5 cm and b = 30 cm) would give power loss as low as 13.8% per 150 m (to reach the Near Experimental Hall at LCLS) using the Vainstein model and assuming inﬁnitely thin screens (see Figure 3). When the screens are around 2-mm thick, for realistic implementation, we can adjust this value using the mode-matching predictions in Table II as an approximate guide, reducing the ﬁnal power loss estimate to 9.4%. If mechanically feasible, we can also use a larger iris radius of 10 cm (exploiting the 1/adependence of loss factor on radius), to achieve an even lower loss of 2.4% per 150 m for inﬁnitely thin screens, which becomes 1.6% for 2-mm thick screens (assuming similar δ eﬀect as in the previous case); see Figure 9. Using the same approach, Table III summarizes propagation power loss values in the range of 3–15 THz for two lines: one with path length of 150 m to reach LCLS’s Near Experimental Hall, while the other is for 350 m to reach the Far Experimental Hall. The inﬂuence of screen thickness on ﬁeld polarization and amplitude proﬁle is shown in Figure (10) for three indicative examples of screen thickness. The polarization (horizontal and invariant across the iris) and amplitude proﬁle (closely resembling a J(2.4r/a) function) seem to be unaﬀected by the thickness variation. FIG. 9. Propagation loss is shown as a function of frequency for two iris radii (a = 5.5 or 10 cm) and two screen thicknesses (0 or 2 mm) and over a distance of 150 m to reach the Near Experimental Hall in LCLS. The iris-line period is b = 30 cm and the eﬀect of thickness is found from the modematching analysis and then used to reﬁne Vainstein’s model (assuming that it is the same eﬀect for both cases, namely ∆Im[β]/Im[β]∼=−33.9%). The larger radius is recommended, if mechanically feasible and does not have a considerable transient at the line’s entrance. Given the small skin depth of good conductors, such as copper or aluminum, at THz frequencies, we can use the well-known perturbation technique to compute the ohmic (conductor) losses at metallic screens, using our knowledge of the tangent magnetic ﬁeld distribution near the screens when such screens are assumed to be perfectly conductive [14]. Speciﬁcally, the attenuation constant due to the conductive loss, α, is calculated by the usual formula where P=R|H|adθdz is the power lost to conductive edges of the screen per unit length of theRRRR line, P=Re[E × H· ˆzrdrdθ] =Re[(EH− EH)rdrdθ] is the total power on the line, and R=p ωµ/(2σ) is the surface resistance for a screen with conductivity σ. Finding the ﬁelds through the modematching equations (48)–(59) then substituting in α, we ﬁnd that the ohmic losses on the iris line are negligible compared to the loss due to diﬀraction or radiation. For example, the attenuation constant α for a Scale-3 irisline structure with 2-mm thick screens is found to be approximately 2.7 × 10(1/m) for copper screens and 3.5 × 10(1/m) for aluminum screens, which are more than 1000-times smaller than the attenuation constant Im[β]∼=0.00041 (1/m) due to diﬀraction (see Table II). FIG. 10. Scale-3 ﬁeld polarization and amplitude proﬁle plots, calculated at pSteps/nSteps = 6666/3333 and plotted at nSteps = 1111: (a)–(c) for δ = 0 mm, (d)–(f) for δ = 2 mm, and (g)–(i) for δ = 10 mm. The polarization and amplitude proﬁles seem unaﬀected by the small increase in screen thickness. Subplots (c), (f) and (i) show E-ﬁeld amplitude proﬁle cuts at the y = 0 plane across the iris, compared to the idealized shape of J the amplitude proﬁle in (f) and (i), which may be a result of low numerical resolution (truncation). As a compatibility check, we drove the current modematching model toward the limit of vanishing gap (approaching a smooth line) to compare the predicted eigenvalues with the well-known values for a smooth circular waveguide. As expected, the hybrid mode decoupled into TE and TM modes in this limit, with the values of βnow approaching a purely real value (due to suppressed radiation by the closing gaps) and equal toq the the analytical values of β=k− (V/a)and β=k− (V/a), where Vis the j-th root of the Jfunction, and Vis the j-th root of the Jfunction, [14]. Speciﬁcally, using a Scale-1 structure with a gap as small as 2∆ = 10mm, the mode-matching code gave β= 62742.6114531 + i0.0023 and β= 62444.425897 + i0.0055, compared to the analytic pre- (2.4r/a) function. A small sharp spike is observed in diction (with at 2∆ = 0) of 62742.611427 + i0 and 62444.425854 + i0, respectively. Notice the good agreement and that the imaginary parts given by the modematching are much smaller (negligible) compared to their values for the open gaps, which had Im[β] ∼ 26 (see Table II). As was mentioned in Section I, the full implementation of this iris-line structure will require addressing further questions, in addition to those discussed above (propagation loss, polarization purity and amplitude proﬁle). These questions pertain to the line dispersion, mode launching and matching from source to line, sensistivity to mechanical tolerances and fabrication misalignments, and the transient regime at the line’s entrance (before the mode settles). Such questions are not the subject of this paper and will be examined in a subsequent publication by the authors. Here we brieﬂy remark that mode launching is expected to have a strong inﬂuence on the length of the transient at the line’s entrance. Indeed, if the incident wave is assumed to be an abstract plane wave, then reaching an equilibrium in the form of a dipole mode on the iris line is expected to be roughly around a distance ∼πa/λfrom the entrance (e.g. see [23] and [24]). However, if the ﬁeld is launched using a speciﬁc mode from the source (e.g. a Gaussian proﬁle with linear polarization from a THz linear undulator), then the transient is expected to be much shorter. Vector ﬁeld analysis using mode matching and clustered expansions has been presented for an overmoded iris-line structure for THz radiation transportation. The analysis includes the eﬀect of ﬁnite screen thickness on the propagation properties of the dominant hybrid mode. As a speciﬁc application, the iris line was investigated as a method for THz radiation transport at LCLS, in the frequency range 3–15 THz. It is observed that having ﬁnite screen thicknesses, up to one tenth of the period of the iris-line (δ < b/10), seems to reduce the attenuation constant Im[β] down to approximately −40% for the highly-overmoded THz iris-line structure proposed for THz transport at LCLS. The horizontal polarization purity across the gap seem to be unaﬀected by the ﬁnite screen thickness. The ﬁeld amplitude proﬁle, which approximately follows a Jfunction proﬁle (close to Gaussian), also seems to be unaﬀected by the ﬁnite screen thickness. The Vainstein-based model predictions, for zero-thickness screens, seems to hold increasingly in agreement with mode-matching numerical predictions for highly-diﬀractive/overmoded structures (limit of small M parameter and large Fresnel numbers), but deviates considerably from numerical mode-matching predictions for mildly-overmoded structures or low Fresnel numbers. Finally, it is observed that the propagation losses on this type of iris line are dominated mainly by diﬀraction loss, rather than ohmic loss. The authors would like to thank Robert Warnock, Sami Tantawi, Emilio Nanni and Jeoﬀ Neilson, of SLAC, Stanford University, for their encouragement and several interesting discussions in relation to this research. This work was supported by the US Department of Energy (contract number DE-AC02-76SF00515). Appendix A: Derivation of power loss, ﬁeld polarization and ﬁeld intensity properties based on In this appendix, we use perturbation theory to derive the vector ﬁeld equations for the desirable dominant mode on the iris-line from Vainstein’s boundary condition, highlighting its low propagation loss, linear polarization and amplitude proﬁle. Vainstein’s complex impedance condition on the virtual pipe (see Figure 1) of the iris-line naturally implies that the general modes propagating in the line will be of the hybrid type (TE and TM modes couple through the impedance). The boundary condition of Vainstein at r = a as formulated by Geloni, et al. [2], can be written for the Eand Eﬁeld envelopes as whereˆβ= 0.824, as given in [2, 6, 7]. The hybrid-mode ﬁeld equations are known for a regular pipe geometry and, if we drop the common factor eefor simplicity (i.e. work in terms of envelopes only), can be written in terms of the transverse and longitudinal components as where Eand Hare constants. In this overmoded structure, with relatively large Fresnel number, N=, it is convenient to work in terms of the small parameter (in anticipation of perturbative analysis) that is inversely proportional to N. Such ap parameter is M = 1/8πN, which was originally introduced in reference [2]. Applying now the condition (A1) to the E, Eﬁelds in (A2), yields the following two relations To nontrivially solve these two equations for the eigenvalue k(the transverse wavenumber), let us multiply (A8) by E/Hand then add/substrate (A9), respectively, to have Let’s use perturbation theory in the small paramater M, and expand kas For the unperturbed case when M → 0, the conditions (A10) and (A11) reduce to From (A13), it is clear that we must either have E= Hor E= −Has solutions. The former of these two is the desirable (balanced) hybrid mode that has a peak amplitude proﬁle at the center of the iris and minimum at the walls (akin to the HE11 mode in traditional microwave corrugated waveguides [8, 12, 13]). The latter of the two, on the other hand, will result in a surface mode that “sticks” to the walls, with a null at the center of the iris, and is undesirably lossy (akin to EH11 mode in traditional microwave corrugated waveguides [8, 12, 13]). Substituting in (A14) we immediately see how having E= Hin (A14) will result in J(ka) = 0 with k= V/a, whereas for E= −Hwe have J(ka) = 0 with k= V/a, where Vdenotes the jroot (zero) of the Bessel function J. The dominant (lowest-order) modes in each of these cases are obtained when n = 1 and give J(2.4r/a) versus J(5.1r/a) proﬁles, respectively. Note that in the case for n = 0 it can be easily shown that the hybrid mode is degenerated to the TE or TM mode families. Let us now continue our treatment with the desirable balanced mode, with E= H, and for β ≈ kfor paraxial high-frequency propagation above cutoﬀ, and using perturbation theory to the ﬁrst order in M and with k= V/a. Using the following Bessel identities [21] and exploiting the fact that our boundary condition has already forced J(ka) = 0 in the unperturbed limit, we can deduce the following relations and perturbative expansions, up to O[M], J(ka) = J(ka + cMa) J(ka) = J(ka + cMa) J(ka) = J(ka + cMa) Substituting from (A20)–(A22) into the original condition in (A11), to ﬁrst order in M, and using the short-hi hand notation J(ka) ≡ Jand− 1≡ ψ, we ﬁnd cas follows where n = 1, 2, 3, ···. The lowest-order (dominant) hybrid mode (n = 1, j = 1) will therefore have approximately the desired proﬁlehi of a J[1 − (1 + i)ˆβM]function. For small M, this is similar to the usual proﬁle of the J(2.4r/a) function, but without allowing the “skirt” of the Jfunction to go exactly to zero on the radius r = a (as it would have in a smooth pipe). This allows the hybrid mode to exist at the boundary due to coupling (impedance) and gives the desired features of this mode of the iris line. The important result (A23) agrees with that predicted by [2] and is similar to the theory of the HE11 balanced hybrid-mode in traditional microwave corrugated guides (e.g. see [8, 12, 13]). One should note, however, that the current model using Vainstein’s boundary condition is mainly governed by diﬀraction phenomena, which dominates the propagation loss (A24), rather than by ohmic (conductor) losses. The propagation loss on the line can now be quantiﬁed using the imaginary part of β, as the attenuation constant. Using the fact that β= k−kand the result in (A23), we can now ﬁnd the power loss (L) on the line by simply calculating 1 −e, which gives, after algebraic manipulation, the following where m ≡ n −1 = 0, 1, 2, ···. Equation (A24) indicates lower losses for higher frequencies (as a function of ω) and for larger radii (as a function of a). Equation (2) is a special case of (A24), taken at n = 1, j = 1. We can now proceed to examine the polarization of this desirable mode. For this balanced mode with n 6= 0, FIG. 11. (a) Transverse electric ﬁeld stream lines and amplitude strength for the dominant hybrid mode (n = 1, j = 1) of the iris line at high-frequency operation (overmoded) above cutoﬀ (k≈ β), based on equations (A25) and (A26). This mode is promising for direct coupling with radiation from a THz linear undulator at LCLS. (b) A comparison between the intensity proﬁles of the Bessel function J(r) and the Gaussian e, where σ is the amplitude rms width. we ﬁnd that (A2) can be reduced to To examine the E ﬁeld polarization, let us now convert equations (A25) and (A26) to the Cartesian coordinates using the transformation ˆr = ˆx cos θ + ˆy sin θ and ˆθ = −ˆx sin θ + ˆy cos θ. After simplifying, this gives the following expression for the transverse ﬁeld =ikEkJ(kr) [ˆx cos(1−n)θ+ˆy sin(1−n)θ](A29) This result highlights the character of the polarization for the iris-line balanced modes. For the dominant mode of interest (n = 1, j = 1), (A29) and (A23) give E= ˆxˆ, (A30) which means that the ﬁeld is only polarized horizontally and it remains so across the entire aperture of the iris (ﬁxed dipole polarization) while its amplitude proﬁle is approximately ≈ J(2.4r/a). This gives an intensity proﬁle that is similar to a Gaussian intensity (note: the proﬁle of Jhas about 97% overlap with a perfect Gaussian FIG. 12. A comparison between the real part of the ﬁeld expansion (A37) and the function J(2.4r/a). The eﬀect of having a small complex perturbation in the argument of the Bessel function will be to slightly lift the amplitude oﬀ zero near the edges, compared to the real function J(2.4r/a). intensity, when both are normalized to the same maximum and have same 1/ewidth below the maximum; see Figure 11b). Therefore, the dominant balanced mode of the iris-line is suitable for direct coupling with undulator radiation (see Figure 11a). As noted earlier, the complex argument of the Bessel function, with small complex perturbation proportional to M will cause the edges of the function skirts to be slightly lifted oﬀ zero at r = a, allowing for the hybrid nature of the mode to be established. Indeed, this can be seen explicitly by writing out the real part of the ﬁnal ﬁeld expression. Since the Bessel’s function Jis an entire function (i.e. analytic everywhere in the complex plane), the proﬁle of Ein (A31) can be explicitly reduced further (with M > 0) to its real and imaginary parts. For any ﬁx r value, one can Taylor expand in the small parameter M to ﬁnd that the ﬁeld proﬁle is proportional to Thus, the real part of ﬁeld proﬁle approximately given which is shown in Figure 12. This shows the polarization and amplitude proﬁle features of the dipole mode on the iris line. As one may expect, this mode is akin to dipole FIG. 13. An illustration of the harmonic distribution over the index n under discussion (top axis), where the dashed line depicts the expected decay in harmonic strength as we move away from the band edges (in red) that represent the dominant harmonic and its image. Given the symmetry in the Bessel functions involved in the diﬀerent bands, it is suﬃcient to focus our treatment on the middle band, between −n and 0, where kis real. A convenient positive integer d is introduced in the derivations, for the middle band, and is illustrated in the bottom axis. modes traditionally seen in similar periodic structures when driven by ultrarelativistic electron bunchs; e.g. see [15, 25]. Appendix B: Formal justiﬁcation for the use of clustering to approximate ﬁeld expansions in an In this appendix we use perturbation theory to derive a justiﬁcation to the practice of clustering in ﬁeld expansions, as used in Section III for a highly-overmoded iris line with paraxial incidence. Speciﬁcally, we wish to show that one can assume that the following two summations are interchangeable where the ﬁrst sum on the RHS is clustered around 0 (dominant harmonic, at n=0), while the second sum is clustered around its image (at n=−n=−2N), where N is deﬁned as the nearest integer to the number of wavelengths per structure period, b/λ; see Figure 13. Here nSteps is chosen by us to provide a local (trunacted) span around the dominant harmonic and its image, such that the overall summation is shorter than the regular summation that would run continuously from −Nto +N, with the arbitrary index Nchosen high enough as to encompass all harmonics between and around the dominant harmonic and its image. The idea behind such a practice stems from an intuitive assumption that the dominant mode corresponds to an almost-TEM wave that is paraxially incident onto the overmoded iris line and slightly perturbed by the presence of the large irises, as discussed in Section III. Let’s show that this assumption is formally justiﬁable. Without loss of generality, we specialize the discussion to the dipole mode (m = 1) of the iris line. We know that the propagation constant for the n harmonic is β= β+ 2πn/b, where βapproaches the wavenumber kfor paraxial propagation high above cutoﬀ. In the limit of an ideal line (lossless with TEM wave), we can put β= k+ 2πn/b, which wouldp lead to a transverse wavenumber k=k− β=p i(2πn/n)+ 4πnk/b. The dipole mode ﬁeld equations at a given point along the line, say z = 0, are given [from (48)–(53)] by It is clear from k= i(2πn/n)+ 4πnk/b that certain n values will lead to real kvalues, while other n values will lead to purely imaginary k= iγ, where γis real. For the former, the Bessel functions in (B2)– (B7) are Bessel functions of the ﬁrst type [e.g. J(kr)], whereas for the latter case, they become, using the relation J(iγr) = iI(γr), modiﬁed Bessel functions of the ﬁrst type [e.g. I(γr)]. To work in terms of real kwe will need negative n values that satisfy 4π|n|k/b ≥ 4|n|π/b, which leads to the requirement that −n≤ n ≤ 0, where n= 2b/λ= 2N. For the remaining values of n, γis real. See Figure 13. Given the symmetry between the two types of formulations, we can work in either set of wavenumbers and Bessel functions (kand J, or γand I) and expect the other to have similar features. We can therefore conﬁne the remainder of this discussion to the formulation using kand Jfunctions over the middle band shown in Figure 13. For the same iris-line dimensions used in Section IV, we have a = 0.05 m, b = 0.33 m, λ= 10m, which give −6666 = −n≤ n ≤ 0. We recognize the edges of this range as the terms we initially assumed to be the dominant harmonic and its image. Let’s next show that the strength of all the harmonics between these two terms (n = 0, −n) get smaller and smaller as we move away from edges. Consider the total complex power associated with each harmonic travelling down the iris line, by calculating the integral (call it I) of the Poynting vector over the line’s cross section, where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation. Before substituting the modal ﬁeld expressions (B2)–(B7) into (B8) to ﬁnd the respective powers carried by the harmonics, we should lift the idealistic assumption of lossless line, since the line will exhibit some loss. We introduce two perturbation parameters and write the complex propagation constant as where ε1 and ε1 represent, respectively, the small shift in real part of βrelative to kand the small attenuation experienced by the waves on the line. Working to ﬁrst order in the small parameters ε, ε, this leads, after algebraic manipulation, to Within the present range of n, we deﬁne the convenient positive-integer measure d as d = n−|n|, using it as our variable, and we substitute n → −|n| in (B10)–(B13), to yield, after reduction to ﬁrst order in ε, εand renaming k∼=−φ1 +iε(n− 2d)n2d(n− d) + εn(n− 2d)(B16) ψ=−φ(n− 2d)n4d(n− d) + εn(n− 2d) FIG. 14. (a) A plot of the convex modulation function, |φ|, responsible for the clustering eﬀect, for the overmoded irisline example with a = 0.055 m, b = 0.33 m, ε= 0.0001 and nof 6666. (b) An example of the eﬀect of the modulation on the oscillatory term 1/J(ψa), plotted using the formula (B30) for the same parameters. The edges of the band (where d tends to 0 or 6666), correspond to the dominant harmonic and its image; clustering is manifested in how the envelope of all harmonics decreases as we move away from band edges. noting that ψ, ψare both real. Substituting from the ﬁelds in (B2)–(B7) into the integral (B8), with the shorthand notation J(kr) → J, we now have (after algebraic reduction and integrating over θ) where we identify four integrals to be performed, all of which involve Bessel functions with complex arguments. To ﬁnd these integrals analytically, we convert the complex argument inside the Bessel functions into a real one by using (B14)–(B17), Taylor expansions in the small imaginary parameter ε(responsible for loss) and the standard Bessel identities for derivatives [21], to write which allow us to evaluate the four integrals. The result of integration can be summarized as We can now substitute back into (B20), noticing that we can approximate |k||J(ka)|∼=φJ(ψr), to ﬁnally yield the power in the nharmonic as This result highlights how all the terms on the RHS will be modulated by the function φ, which is a convex function of d that decays as we move towards the midpoint of the band. Thus, this function is responsible for local harmonic power decay as we move away from the dominant harmonic and its image (at the band edges where d tends to 0 and n); see Figure (13). Using (B14), we can plot this convex modulating function as shown in Figure 14a. Note that even though some of the terms in the RHS of (B28) contain the function 1/J(ψa), which is highly oscillatory for an overmoded structure, their envelope will still be modulated by the function φto exhibit lower power strengths as their harmonic index n (or d) moves away from dominant harmonic and its image. Indeed, this can be conveniently visualized by explicitly taking the asymptotical form of Jfor large argumentp [21], J(ψa) ∼2/(πψa) sin(ψa − π/4), then perturbatively expanding this form as well as the ψfunction, to ﬁrst order in the small parameter ε [1] Z. Zhang, A. S. Fisher, M. C. Hoﬀmann, B. Jacobson, P. S. Kirchmann, W.-S. Lee, A. Lindenberg, A. Marinelli, E. Nanni, R. Schoenlein, M. Qian, S. Sasaki, J. Xu, and Z. Huang, A high-power, high-repetition-rate THz source for pump–probe experiments at Linac Coherent Light Source II, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 27, 890 (2020). [2] G. Geloni, V. Kocharyan, and E. Saldin, Scheme for generating and transporting thz radiation to the x-ray experimental ﬂoor at the lcls baseline (2011), arXiv:1108.1085 [physics.acc-ph]. [3] R. Pan, E. Zapolnova, T. Golz, A. J. Krmpot, M. D. Rabasovic, J. Petrovic, V. Asgekar, B. Faatz, F. Tavella, A. Perucchi, S. Kovalev, B. Green, G. Geloni, T. Tanikawa, M. Yurkov, E. Schneidmiller, M. Gensch, and N. Stojanovic, Photon diagnostics at the FLASH THz beamline, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 26, 700 (2019). [4] S. Saunders and A. Aragon-Zavala, Antennas and propagation for wireless communication systems, 2nd ed. (Wiley, 2007). [5] A. Chao, Physics of Collective Beam Instabilities in High Energy Accelerators (Wiley, 1993). [6] L. A. Vainstein, Open Resonators and Open Waveguides (Colem Press, 1969). [7] L. A. Vainstein, Open resonators for lasers, Sov. Phys. JETP 17, 709. [8] S. F. Mahmoud, Electromagnetic Waveguides: theory and applications, Electromagnetic Waves (Institution of Engineering and Technology, 1991). [9] G. Stupakov and K. L. F. Bane, Surface impedance formalism for a metallic beam pipe with small corrugations, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 15, 124401 (2012). [10] F. E. Borgnis and C. H. Papas, Electromagnetic waveguides and resonators, in Elektrische Felder und Wellen / Electric Fields and Waves (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1958) pp. 285–422. Figure 14b uses (B30) to plot the modulated oscilla- tory termφJ(ψa), showing the clustering envelope over the oscillating terms. [11] R. G. E. Hutter, Beam and wave electronics in microwave tubes (Van Nostrand Company, 1960). [12] P. Clarricoats, A. Olver, and S. Chong, Attenuation in corrugated circular waveguides. part 1: Theory, Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers 122, 1173 (1975). [13] P. Clarricoats, A. Olver, and S. Chong, Attenuation in corrugated circular waveguides. part 2: Experiment, Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers 122, 1180 (1975). [14] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering (Wiley, 2011). [15] B. Zotter and K. Bane, Transverse resonances of periodically widened cyclindrical tubes with circular cross section 10.2172/6614581 (1979). [16] A. Zangwill, Modern Electrodynamics (Cambridge University Press, 2012). [17] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, 1998). [18] P. M. Morse and H. Feshbach, Methods of Theoretical Physics (McGraw-Hill Company, 1953). [19] R. Collin, FOUNDATIONS FOR MICROWAVE ENGI- NEERING, 2ND ED, McGraw-Hill series in electrical engineering: Radar and antennas (Wiley India Pvt. Limited, 2007). [20] J. C. Slater, Microwave Electronics (Dover Publishers, 1950). [21] DLMF, NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, http://dlmf.nist.gov/, Release 1.0.28 of 2020-0915, f. W. J. Olver, A. B. Olde Daalhuis, D. W. Lozier, B. I. Schneider, R. F. Boisvert, C. W. Clark, B. R. Miller, B. V. Saunders, H. S. Cohl, and M. A. McClain, eds. [22] B. Saleh and M. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1991). [23] R. Palmer, A qualitative study of wake ﬁelds for very short bunches, Part. Accel. 25, 97 (1990). [24] J. Lawson, Radiation from a ring charge passing through a resonator, Part. Accel. 25, 107 (1990). [25] K. Bane and P. Wilson, Longitudinal and transverse wake potentials in slac., Experientia 40, 592 (1980).