E-mail addresses: The lack of scientiﬁc openness is identiﬁed as one of the key challenges of computati o nal reproducibility. In addition to Open Data, Free and Open-source Software (FOSS) and Open Hardware (OH) can address this challenge by introducing open policies, standards, and recommendations. However, while both FOSS and OH are free to use, study, modify, and redistribute, there are signi ﬁcant diﬀerences in sharing and reusing these artifacts . FOSS is increasingly supported with software repositories, but support for OH is lacking, potentially due to the com plexity of its digital format and licensing. This paper propo ses leveraging FAIR principles to make OH ﬁndable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable. We deﬁne what FAIR means for OH, how it diﬀers from FOSS, and present examples of unique demands. Also, we evaluate disseminat ion platforms currently us ed for OH and provide recommendations. Keywords: computational reproducibility, FAIR, free software, FOSS, open data, open hardware, open science, open-sou rce. Open science emerged as a movement to make scientiﬁc research available to broad audiences, from professionals to the general public [ and softwareshould be made transparent and accessible whenever possible [4, 5, 6]. The movement, helped by community-driven eﬀo rts such as the Turing Way [ includes practices like open access to publish ed research, releasing software as Free and Open-Source (FOSS), and experimental instruments as Open-Source Hardware or Open Hardware (OH).1 These open practices aim to facilitate scientiﬁc veriﬁcation, reuse, and collaboration and to inspire trustworthiness in science. Software and hardware have been an integral part of scientiﬁc research and are increasingly recognized in academic journals and conferences that often encourage their dissemination upon publication. FOSS is , by deﬁnition, software that "respects users’ freedom and community," which means that it adheres to four essential freedoms: to run t he program, to study how th e program works, to redistribute copies, and to distri bute the mod iﬁed copies (commercially or n o n-commercially) [ artifact, either electrical or mechanical, whose design information is available to, and us able by, the publ ic in a way that allows anyone to make, modify, distribute, and use" i t [ and legal principles and can refer to a wide range of objects such as computers, scientiﬁc i nstruments, 3D printed furniture, physical constructions, and robots. In practice, OH is comm only captured as digital schematics and drawing s with design instru ct ions and a license that allows a reuser to construct and put Nadi ca Miljković, Ana Trisovic, Limor Peer nadica.miljkovic@etf.bg.ac.rs, anatrisovic@g.harvard.edu, limor.peer@yale.edu it to use.2 The OH concept was modeled on free s oftware, which led to many issues as software and hardware are fundamentally diﬀerent and comply with diﬀerent standards and d es ign princi ples [ challenges o f OH reuse include high costs in its construction, imprecise documentation, and complex licensing [14, 15, 16, 12]. In particular, th e cost of reusing OH can be high as it implies building custommade physical artifacts at n on-negligible expenses, while in con trast, the cost of reusing FOSS is often marginal.3 E ven slight i mprecision in OH description, such as resistor power in schematics, can lead to an unintended ﬁnal product and a failed investment. Also, OH licenses are complex and have the added risk of patent infringement because OH s peciﬁcations encompass various artifacts, including design schemes and simulation codes [ be particularly challenging. Reproducibility refers to "obtain ing consistent result s using the same input data, comp utational steps, methods, and code, and conditio ns of analysis" [ reproducibility led to a surge of research and development, making scient iﬁc work more streamlined, but the challenges of OH reuse still remained. In this paper, we p ropose an application of FAIR principl es [ OH dissemination and reuse. We modify FAIR p rincip les to incorpo rate the needs of OH users. M oreover, we examine current dissemination platforms and evaluate their eﬀectiveness fo r OH. Our recomm endations support open-source values and practical im plementations that make OH more d iscoverable, reusable, and transp arent. They should be of interest to OH u sers, scientists, and repository managers. We can distinguish three components of OH digital form: physical design , soft ware, and documentation (Fig. 1). The physical design includes m echanical drawings, connectivity diagrams (schematics), b ills of materials, printed circuit boards (PCB), layout data, and more. The software com ponent may include HDL (hardware description language) source code, which is used to simulate and validate the design’s intended functionality while allowing architectural exploration and comparing variations of a base design . The software component may also include software ﬁrmware (drivers) that operate the hardware, an open interface to the hardware, and an open implementation covering a set of tool s to create and test a Figure 1: Components of OH (inspired by O SHWA [15, 16]). 15]. Becaus e of these issues, reusing or reproducing a study based on OH can design. Finally, th e documentation component oﬀers information on assemblin g and running the OH. Understanding the structure of OH helps us grasp the complexity of its capture, dissemination, and reuse. The use of O H in science has been recognized internationally by researchers and i nstitutions. The nonproﬁt Open Source Hardware Association (OSHWA) fosters technological knowledge of hardware, promotes its devel opment, and maintains certi ﬁcation . The increased popul arity of OH is demonstrated by the signiﬁcant rise of certi ﬁed projects over a sin gle year (64%, from 977 on August 24, 2020 to 160 1 on July 19, 2 021) [22]. It is estimated that a natio nal OH po licy in Finland (with a fundi ng mechanism that supports OH development) would provi de 90% in savings compared to the cost of proprietar y hardware [17], which is in line with the EU ﬁndings [23]. The ﬁrst oﬃcial government document wit h a strategy for FOSS in research for 2021-2024 was released in July 202 1 by the French Ministry of H igher Education, Research, and Innovation [ Research (CERN) introducing a po licy to publish its experimental hardware in o pen access journals and invest in OH in itiatives [ An example o f a highly successful and widely used OH design i s t he Arduin o MEGA 2560 microcontroller board (screenshot of the design ﬁle shown i n Fig. 2). With the open design ﬁle and i ts permissi ve li cense, a replica (Fig. 3 right) of the original printed circuit board (Fig. 3 left) can be produced and legally sold around the world [26]. However, the copies cannot con tain the Arduino name and logo as the trademark is protected. The trademark can be u sed if a company becomes an oﬃcial manufacturer, such as Smart Projects in Italy, SparkFun in the USA, and Dog Hunter in Taiwan/China [ programmable and able to receive input (e.g., read input from a light sensor) and generate output according to a custom algorithm (e.g., if a room is dark, turn on the light) at a low price (e.g., MEGA 256 board costs at most 35 EUR [ used i n scientiﬁc research [ To illustrate the challenges of OH disseminatio n and reuse in scientiﬁc research, we examin e three published studies that used OH: Actiﬁeld device for measuring movements of laboratory rodents [ 28]). In add ition to simple applications, Arduino b oards have b een extensively 17, 29], including as part of other OH desi gns [30,31,32]. Figure 3: Comparison of the original Arduino MEGA 2560 board produced in Italy on the left, and a derived MEGA 256 0 board produced in China based on the open design (see schematics at Fig. 2). a non-contact therm o meter to prevent the s pread of the contagious diseases [ board BioAmp EXG Pill for measuri ng signals in the human bod y such as electrical heart potentials or electrocardiogram (ECG) [ Three dedicated licenses were applied for the BioAmp EXG Pill d esign, software, and d ocumentation, as mandated for OSHWA certiﬁcation (Tab. 1). Projects disseminated through HardwareX journal are assigned the same license for both hardware and software components: for the thermometer, a CC BY-SA license was applied, and for the acti ﬁeld device, a GNU GPL l icense was used. The CC license is mainly intended for work regulated by copyright law (e.g., for boo ks, mus ic, photographs, articles) and therefore is less suitable for software and OH . On the other hand, the GNU GPL license is widely used for FOSS, but it is ineligible for OH. The documentation was licensed under CC BY in all u se cases, but some diﬀerences emerged. For example, the actiﬁeld device and the thermometer HardwareX articles provi de more details for further OH reuse due to th e article temp late requiring in formation such as build and operation instructions , valid at ion and characterization, and the bill of materials [ of dissemination through specialized journals s uch as HardwareX is the application of persistent identi ﬁers. Although OSHWA also provides unique identiﬁers, information on their p ersi stence is not available. The Open Science Framework (OSF), as a common choice for disseminating OH d esign ﬁles, was used for the actiﬁeld and the thermometer studi es. However, while t he actiﬁeld data contain stru ct ured OSF metadata (e.g., license, registration DOI, tags), t he thermometer data deposit lacks structure and has only two fol ders w ith code and images. On the ot her hand, the BioAmp EXG Pill d at a deposit provides metadata on GitHub (e.g., keywords, license) but without a persistent identiﬁer. Interestingly, some of the actiﬁeld data are not shared but available "on reasonable request" [ published in an open-access journal. This presents another complexity in its reuse as the study had closed data, open design ﬁles, FOSS, and open documentation. From the examined use cases, we identify t he following challenges of OH reuse: (1) choosing adequate licenses for its design, software, data, and documentation, (2) i dentifying a dissemin at ion channel (e.g., OSHWA, HardwareX, GitHub, or other), (3) organizing, separating and interlinking resources (e.g., if software and hardware are used for the same purpos e researchers tend to choose th e same license), and (4) providi ng detailed metadata and documentatio n on OH to be reusable, modiﬁable, and reproducible. Some of these challenges have been previously reported [ practice. In additi on, establishing a specialized repository for OH dissemi nation has not been examined. In the followin g, we elaborate on the identiﬁed challenges. The separation of physical and software components of OH has been advised wit h th e instru ct ion to use traditional software licenses for ﬁrmware and code loaded in programmable electronic devices [34, 11, 35]. However, schematics with a graphical circuit representation can fall between the analog design and software code categories. They are not solely a connectivity diagram and can serve for circuit simulation and even produce data as, for example, in the Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis (SPICE) [36]. Further, a complexity can emerge when OH is a part of another O H, such as for example, in the non-contact thermometer (licensed under GNU GPL) containing an Arduino UNO unit licensed with Creative Common s (CC BY SA) license [ requiring an application-oriented approach rather than deﬁning a common framework [ Specialized licenses for the OH design component include the CERN Open Hardware License (CERN OHL) with three sharing mechanisms (strongly reciprocal, weakly reciprocal, and permissive), Solderpad, based on the A pache software license, and Tucson Amateur Packet Radio (TAPR) license, adapted from the GNU General Public License. The Solderpad license maintained by the Free and Open Source Silicon Foundation (foss i-foundation.org), has al so been recommended as a software license [ hardware licenses have existed for about a decade, some of t h e most successful OH designs (e.g., Arduino) are l icensed under Creative Commons (CC) Attribu tion Share-Alike 2.5 (released in 2005 before the establishment of OH licenses). The precondition for OH reuse is that one can access its complete design (i.e., open-source code) [ Public availability of OH is beneﬁcial as sharing provides a ﬁr m base for democratic participation in production and reuse [ In response to a growing need for medical devices [ on COVID-19 medical hardware [41] presenting, for example, an open-source solutio n for non-contact temperature m easurem ent [31]. 38], especially in response to global crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic [39,40]. However, there is no universally used reposit ory for open hardware [13]. The three most comm on disseminati on methods are the Open Hardware repository (ohwr.o rg), git-based repositories (e.g., GitHub, GitLab), and v ia dedicated journals (i.e., HardwareX, Journal of Open Hardware, Journal of Open Engineering). Certiﬁed hardware is typically hosted on GitHub, but som e are shared on Google Drive or personal and prod ucer websites and indexed at OSHWA [ for sharing OH and FOSS, including OSF, Mendeley Dat a, GitHub, and Zenodo. Researchers and develop ers com monly use GitHub to share, store and version their code, d at a, design ﬁles, and documentation. It is based on a well-known distributed version-control system, Git, used for collaborative work in the software developer communi ty. There are numerous beneﬁts of using git-based platforms such as GitHub, GitLab, and BitBucket, but som e precautions are warranted. For instance, the current list of oﬃcially oﬀered licenses at GitHub does not include any OH licenses. In addition, there i s neither a uniformly appli cable curation policy nor metadata. FSF constantly evaluates popular repositories and does not encourage using GitHub for several reasons , including the incomplete li censing practice and the us e of proprietary software on the platform [ GitHub, are free of charge, convenient to use [ develop ment [5, 44]. They seamless ly incorporate advanced tools like workﬂows, software testing, and persistent id entiﬁers [ Furthermore, git-based platforms can enable FAIR-compliant resource shar ing with additional eﬀorts from OH depositors. For instance, th e lack of metadata can be bridged with rich documentation in readme ﬁles. Zenodo, Dataverse, and other similar repositories mainly used for sharing publications , data, and software, can also be employed for OH dissemination. Zenodo even supports a deposit type such as Physical Object in th e general "Other" category. The main disadvantage of Zenodo is that it does not incorporate software or hardware licenses. Dataverse, on the other hand, specializes in the disseminatio n of data, meaning that licenses would n eed to be applied manually. However, both repositories mint a unique identiﬁer DOI, are free to use and have a long-term preservation commitment. Hardware is generally less do cumented than software, even though consistent documentation is crucial for complete and accurate OH [ in terms of the freedoms of FOSS: freedom to study can be exercised by the schematics publ ication (see Fig. 2 for Arduino MEGA 2560); publ ishing docum ents in editable format can support the freedom to modify; freedom to make can be practiced by the publication of bill of materials and assembly in structions , and the selection of appropriate license can grant freedom to distribute. In addition to these principles, it is proposed that documentation o f OH should incorp orate guidelines for participation, d egree of maturity of the s hared OH (i.e., design, prototype, full product), and the status of the community (e.g., active or not active) [13]. Although setti ng an OH documentation standard has been considered critical [13], it has not materialized, to the best of our k n owledge. Structured metadata presents an essential aspect o f the overall project documentation, especially machine actionable metadata, which is integral to FAIR princip les. We address OH metadata in the following section. In order to facilitate high-quality research disseminati o n in th e information age, a set of FAIR principles emerged to improve the ﬁndability, accessibility, i nteroperability, and reuse of digital assets. The guidelines emphasized machine-actionability and d at a management with minimal human intervention due to the ever-in creasing complexity and volume of data. The FAIR princip les have since been widely 5, 44]. GitHub has built-in suppor t for repository citations as of August 2021 [45]. 13, 4 6]. Bonvoisin et al. referred to the completeness of OH documentation recognized and employed in many data repositories and data archiving warehouses. Even though they were primarily int ended for dat a shar ing, they found an application in sharing of software code [ as code availability was identiﬁed as an essential component of scientiﬁc reproducibility [4, 47]. We argue that OH is t he next frontier for FAIR principles. The ﬁrst FAIR principle, or Finable, mandates that "data and m etadat a should be easy to ﬁnd for both humans and computers" [ designs and provi des a unique identiﬁer, which is not persistent but can be used for this purpose, and commonly used DOIs can b e a v iable alternative. Accessibility mandates access to the resource, potentially with authentication or authorization. It means that OH needs to be retrievable using its digital record via an open, free, and universally used protocol, such as HTTP. T he protocol should allow for authentication and authorization when necessary. Interoperability means that "data needs to be integ rated with other data" and that it "needs to interoperate with applications or workﬂows for analysis, storage, and processing" [7]. Last, the Reuseable principle mandates that "metadata and data should be well-described so t hat they can be replicated and/or combined in d iﬀerent settings" [7] for optimal reuse. OH should be described with machine-readable metadata, which is critical for automatically discovering resources on t he web. An ongoing Field Ready project (2021-2023) aims to devel op and maintai n metadata standards for OH.4 Since FAIR principles have been proposed and applied to research data and software, their implementation on OH, which incorporates both, should be attainable. Some aspects o f FAIR can be reused from previous work, though there are gaps that need to be addressed for each principle, and an interpretation for OH should be more clearly provided. In Tab. 2 we show an appli cation of FAIR principles, using "hardware" to d enote the d igital description of OH (as shown in Fig. 1). Findability for OH may be implemented with unique identiﬁers and speciﬁc metadata similarly to its implementati on for research data and so ft ware. Regarding accessibility, we note that infrastru ct ure for OH disseminati on remains a challenge as OH ﬁles are currently often (disassembled and) shared at multiple places. For interoperability, we emphasize the use of standard knowledge representation and cross-referencing of all required components of OH. Finally, the reusable p rincip le calls for adequate licenses and provenance for all components of OH. Here, we propose a new su b-princi ple (R2) mandatin g an expl icit dependency tree of OH to other required components, which may includ e a dependency on other hardware (Tab. 2). The sub-princip le was modeled on the FAIR for research software framework and furt her expanded it to a physical realm by adding a reference to available com ponents required for successful OH reuse. Similar to research data which may not always be released as open d ata, some speciﬁc caveats exist wh en working with OH. First, source code can be FAIR and shared even if it has proprietary dependencies. For example, t he most common source code at the Harvard Dataverse research repository i s proprietary [ Similarly, hardware components can com ply with the FAIR principles even with proprietary dependencies. Second, some OH medical diagnosis and treatment designs may be limited to research purposes only. Therefore, appropriate regulations and legislation fo r designs with the intended medical application need to b e speciﬁed before their diss emination [ 7]. OH should be identiﬁed with a unique ID. OSHWA cert iﬁes open hardware Table 2: FAIR principles for data [21], research software [49], and open hardware (proposed, Table 2: FAIR principles for data [21], research software [49], and open hardware (proposed, The CURE-FAIR (CUrating for REproducible FAIR data and code) RDA (Research Data Alliance) working group [20] investigated the current landscape for the adoption of best practices for computational reproducibility by acquiring recomm end at ions and challenges from both literature and the community. The report highlighted the importance o f openness and provided some key remarks including FAIR and beyond-FAIR challenges for reproducibility using FOSS, which are also relevant for OH. Applying FAIR principles from research data to software tur ned out to be non-triv ial due to the software complexity and unsteadiness [ software, versi on control, quality control, computational eﬃcacy, and others have been ident iﬁed as valuable [44, 20]. OH adds to this complexity as, for example, schematics can be seen as both design ﬁle and soft ware, and can even produce data. It has been suggested that before deﬁning EU p olicies on OH and adopt ing OH widely, appropriate guid el ines for OH concerning existing ind ustrial standards shoul d be introduced [23]. Progress has already been made in Germany where the Association of Open Source Ecology Germany (OSEG), in collaboration with the G erman Institute for Stand ardi zati on, has carried out a project that aims to develop standardization for OH termed DIN SPEC 3105 [ The need for reuse and enhanced ﬁndability of existing OH designs has been recognized and addressed in the literature [53]. Ezoji et al. conclude that there is a need for good documentation practices that would enable reusability. We believe that applying FAIR princip les to OH and adopt ing goo d reproducibility practices would enhance the reuse of existing OH designs in research and the industry. Besides code availability, an in-detail description o f the s oftware, its environment, and hardware requirements should be available to enable reproducibl e outputs [ The paper provides a perspective on leveraging FAIR principles for the dissemination of scientiﬁc OH. Considering contemporary science m otivations, from research reproducibility to open collaboration, we believe that applying FAIR principles to OH would be a signiﬁcant step forward, making it documented, ﬁnable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable on t he web. Thus, it would improve OH curation and its recognition as a complete scientiﬁc output. In addition, eﬀective OH di ssemination would aid reproducibility on a higher level , beyond the comput ational part of the study process. FAIR cannot guarantee complete openness of hardware, working functionality, and reproducibility, but it would undou btedly facili tate it and provide venues for further research across d isciplines. Incorporating FAIR principles in the di ssemination of scientiﬁc OH and adopting best practices such as free OSHWA certiﬁcation would provide a solid ground for reproducible and reusable research results . AT is funded by Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (grant number P-2020-13988). NM was partly supported by Grant No. TR33020 funded by the Ministr y of Education, Science and Technological Development, Republic of Serbia. The authors would like to thank CURE-FAIR members for their valuable contribution to the RDA community.