during the early stages of the universe, taking place for a period of about 20 minutes after the big bang. Deuterium production, in particular, is highly sensitive to the primordial baryon density and the number of neutrino species, and its abundance serves as a sensitive test for the conditions in the early universe. The comparison of observed deuterium abundances with predicted ones requires reliable knowledge of the relevant thermonuclear reaction rates, and their corresponding uncertainties. Recent observations reported the primordial deuterium abundance with percent accuracy, but some theoretical predictions based on BBN are at tension with the measured values because of uncertainties in the cross section of the deuterium-burning reactions. In this work, we analyze the S-factor of the D(p,γ)He reaction using a hierarchical Bayesian model. We take into account the results of eleven experiments, spanning the period of 1955–2021; more than any other study. We also present results for two diﬀerent ﬁtting functions, a two-parameter function based on microscopic nuclear theory and a four-parameter polynomial. Our recommended reaction rates have a 2.2% uncertainty at 0.8 GK, which is the temperature most important for deuterium BBN. Diﬀerences between our rates and previous results are discussed. Keywords: methods: numerical — nuclear reactions, nucleosynthesis, abundances — primordial nucle- Apart from the universal expansion and the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation, the third observational evidence for the hot big bang model derives from big bang (i.e., primordial) nucleosynthesis (BBN). The detailed comparison between the measured and predicted primordial abundances of the light elements (He, D,He, andLi) provides a sensitive test of the BBN model because the abundances span a range of nine orders of magnitude. This theory is parameter-free, since we know from the Zlineshape measured by CERN’s Large Electron-Positron (LEP) collider that the number of light neutrino families is three. We also know, with 0.62% precision, the baryonic density of the universe, Ω·h= 0.02242±0.00014, from the measurement of the CMB anisotropies by the Planck Collaboration et al. (2020), combined with baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) data (Alam et al. 2017). Over the past years, measured primordial D andHe abundance values have been reported with precision reaching percent levels. The deuterium primordial abundance is determined from observations of cosmological clouds at high redshift on the line of sight of distant quasars. Recently, new observations and the reanalysis of existing data by Cooke et al. (2018) resulted in an average value of D/H = (2.527 ±0.030) ×10(with 1.2% precision). The primordial abundance ofHe is deduced from observations in Hii (ionized hydrogen) regions of compact blue galaxies. Aver et al. (2015) obtained aHe nucleon fraction of Y= 0.2449 ±0.0040, which was recently updated to a value of Y= 0.2453 ±0.0034 (with 1.4% precision) by including data from the extremely metal-poor galaxy Leo P (Aver et al. 2021). The primordial abundances ofHe andLi do not provide useful constraints for BBN at this time. The nuclideHe is both produced and destroyed by stars and, therefore, its abundance evolution is not well understood. The measuredLi abundance is a factor of ≈ 3 smaller compared to the BBN predictions (e.g., Fields 2011; Pitrou et al. 2018). Although this cosmological lithium problem has not found a satisfactory solution yet, the present consensus is that it is most likely not caused by erroneous nuclear physics input (Davids 2020; Iliadis & Coc 2020). In this work, we will focus on the more recently discovered tension between the measured and predicted primordial D/H values (Coc et al. 2015; Pitrou et al. 2018; Iliadis & Coc 2020). Less than a dozen nuclear reactions are important for the BBN of the light elements, and only ﬁve are important for deuterium production. Deuterium is directly produced through the p(n,γ)D reaction and destroyed by the D(p,γ)He, D(d,n)He, and D(d,p)H reactions. The weak interactions, n↔p, that convert neutrons to protons, and vice versa, can be precisely calculated by using as experimental input either the neutron lifetime τ= 879.4 ±0.6 s (Zyla et al. 2020) or, alternatively, the quark mixing angle Vand the nucleon axial coupling constant g(Pitrou et al. 2018; Pitrou et al. 2021a). The uncertainty in the weak rates is ≈0.06%, which will impact theHe abundance, but has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the deuterium abundance. The p(n,γ)D reaction rate is obtained from eﬀective ﬁeld theory (Ando et al. 2006) with an uncertainty of <1% at BBN temperatures. Experimental D(d,n)He and D(d,p)H reaction rates have recently been reanalyzed using hierarchical Bayesian models (Gómez Iñesta et al. 2017), resulting in uncertainties of about ≈1%. The remaining reaction rate, D(p,γ)He, has also been reanalyzed using a Bayesian model (Iliadis et al. 2016). It was found to have a much larger uncertainty (3.7% at 0.8 GK) compared to the other processes involving deuterium, which impacts the predicted primordial deuterium abundance signiﬁcantly. Recently, new D(p,γ)He cross section data for the energy range important for BBN (20 − 300 keV in the d+p center of mass) have been reported by three experiments (Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020; Turkat et al. 2021). Based on the ﬁrst two works, updated rates have been adopted in simulations to study the BBN production of deuterium (Mossa et al. 2020; Pitrou et al. 2021a; Pisanti et al. 2021; Yeh et al. 2021). Results are displayed in Figure 1. It is apparent that the predicted D/H values of Mossa et al. (2020), Pisanti et al. (2021), and Yeh et al. (2021) agree with the observed value (Cooke et al. 2018), although the uncertainties on the predicted abundances signiﬁcantly exceed those on Yeh 2021 Pitrou 2021 Pisanti 2021 Mossa 2020 Cooke 2018 Figure 1. Primordial D/H number abundance ratio from BBN predictions (black) and observations (red). References: Cooke et al. (2018) (2.527±0.030); Mossa et al. (2020) (2.52± 0.03 ± 0.06); Pitrou et al. (2021a) (2.439 ± 0.037); Pisanti et al. (2021) (2.54 ± 0.07); Yeh et al. (2021) (2.51 ± 0.11). Uncertainties refer to combined standard uncertainties (i.e., 1σ). the measured abundance. On the other hand, the more precise prediction of Pitrou et al. (2021a) (see also Coc et al. (2015) and Figure 3 in Iliadis & Coc (2020)) displays an ≈ 1.8σ-tension with the observations. If conﬁrmed, it could have important implications pointing to new physics beyond the standard model. The BBN abundance predictions from modern public codes, such as PArthENoPE (Consiglio et al. 2018; Gariazzo et al. 2021) or PRIMAT (Pitrou et al. 2018), or private codes as in Yeh et al. (2021), essentially diﬀer only by the set of adopted thermonuclear reaction rates. Since a precision on the order of 1% is required for all reaction rates impacting the light nuclide abundances, the goal of the present work is to reanalyze the important D(p,γ)He rates by taking into account the latest experimental results (Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020; Turkat et al. 2021) and adopting a hierarchical Bayesian model. In Section 2 we will discuss data selection, statistical models, and ﬁtting functions. Section 3 introduces our Bayesian model. Results are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents our new reaction rates, together with a comparison to previous results. A concluding summary is provided in Section 6. In the Appendix, we discuss the data considered for the analysis. Before presenting our analysis, we ﬁnd it necessary to comment on a few issues that are not always spelled out in the recent literature, and which have caused some confusion. Nonresonant thermonuclear reaction rates are computed from the astrophysical S-factor (see below). Generally, the S-factor can be estimated by two diﬀerent methods. First, if no experimental data exist, it can be calculated based purely on some nuclear reaction model (“theory-based S-factor”). Second, if experimental data exist, an experimental S-factor can be estimated by using a statistical model that will, by necessity, employ some ﬁtting function (“experiment-based S-factor”). Reaction rates for D(p,γ)He that are obtained from a theory-based S-factor are shown, e.g., as green lines in Figure 3 of Pisanti et al. (2021) or Figure 2 of Yeh et al. (2021). Since experimental data exist for the D(p,γ)He reaction, few researchers would adopt a theory-based Sfactor in their BBN simulations. Because the goal for the D(p,γ)He reaction is the estimation of an experiment-based S-factor, we need to discuss the assumptions that can lead to diﬀerent results obtained by diﬀerent groups using diﬀerent methods of analysis. Three main sources may cause such diﬀerences. First, the data sets to be analyzed need to be selected. Second, a statistical model for the data analysis must be chosen. Third, a function to be ﬁtted in the statistical analysis has to be adopted. We will discuss these issues sequentially. Diﬀerent kinds of nuclear reaction data can be used in the statistical analysis. The best ones to use pertain to cross sections or S-factors obtained in direct measurements of the reaction of interest, i.e., D(p,γ)He, over a wide region of energies which include the range of importance for BBN (20 − 300 keV in the d + p center of mass system). Another possibility is to adopt data from the reverse reaction,He(γ,p)D, and apply the reciprocity theorem to calculate the cross section or Sfactor for D(p,γ)He. Indirect measurements are a third possibility; i.e., data obtained in a reaction (e.g., proton transfer) other than the one of direct interest, from which the D(p,γ)He S-factor can be deduced by applying some nuclear reaction model. For the D(p,γ)He reaction, most BBN studies have focused on the ﬁrst two possibilities. A major problem with the third possibility is the diﬃculty of reliably estimating the systematic uncertainties involved. Table 1 provides an overview of the nuclear data sets (listed in the ﬁrst column) used in the present and previous D(p,γ)He rate estimates (top row). All of the listed experiments represent direct measurements of the D(p,γ)He reaction at astrophysically important energies. The only exception is the work of Warren et al. (1963), which represents the measurement of the reverse reaction,He(γ,p)D. For the works of Warren et al. (1963); Schmid et al. (1997); Ma et al. (1997); Casella et al. (2002); Tišma et al. (2019); Mossa et al. (2020); Turkat et al. (2021), suﬃcient information is provided to estimate both the statistical and systematic uncertainties of the S-factor. These “absolute data” represent the most important data sets because their absolute normalizations impact the magnitude of the ﬁtted S-factor. For the experiments of Griﬃths & Warren (1955); Grifﬁths et al. (1962, 1963); Bailey et al. (1970), either no uncertainties or only combined (statistical and systematic) uncertainties are presented in the original works. Although we do not trust the absolute normalization of the latter data sets, they do contain valuable information on the energy dependence of the S-factor. Therefore, we will implement them into our Bayesian model as “relative data” only, as will be explained in Section 3. All of these data just discussed apply to center-of-mass energies below 2 MeV. Since deuterium synthesis occurs at BBN energies between 20 keV and 300 keV, data at energies above 2 MeV are irrelevant for the considerations of the present work. We disregarded three of the experiments listed in Table 1 (Wölﬂi et al. 1967; Geller et al. 1967; Bystritsky et al. 2008) because they provide too little information to extract reliable S-factors. All of these experiments are discussed in more detail in Appendix A. The appendix also lists, for certain data sets, numerical S-factor values if they had not been reported previously. In total, we take eleven experiments into account in our Bayesian analysis, more than any other BBN study. These data sets are displayed in Figures 2 and 3. The circles depict data for which we adopt absolute normalizations, while triangles refer to relative data. Displayed error bars refer to statistical uncertainties for the absolute data only. In some cases, the error bar is smaller than the symbol size. The D(p,γ)He rate used by Pitrou et al. (2018) was adopted from Iliadis et al. (2016) and rests on just four experiments (Schmid et al. 1997; Ma et al. 1997; Casella et al. 2002; Bystritsky et al. 2008). Their strategy was to include only those data sets that reported both statistical and systematic uncertainties, while the two most recent measurements (Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020) had not been published yet. Notice that, in the present study, we disregarded the data of Bystritsky et al. (2008) which were taken into account in the previous evaluations of Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016). Our reasoning is explained in Appendix A.13. The BBN study of Yeh et al. (2021) considered six experiments and disregarded the works of Griﬃths & Warren (1955); Warren et al. (1963); Griﬃths et al. (1963); Geller et al. (1967); Bailey et al. (1970); Bystritsky et al. (2008); Tišma et al. (2019). They neither used the results of Bailey et al. (1970) nor Griﬃths et al. (1963) “due to systematic issues with the stopping powers.” We concur with their explanation (see Appendix A), but instead we include these data as relative S-factors, as will be explained below. The BBN study of Pisanti et al. (2021) took nine experiments into account, disregarding the works of Grifﬁths & Warren (1955); Wölﬂi et al. (1967); Bailey et al. (1970); Bystritsky et al. (2008). It can be seen from Table 1 that their data selection is nearly identical to that of the present work, although their analysis diﬀers from ours (see below). The very recently published S-factors of Turkat et al. (2021) could not be considered in any of the above BBN studies. Yeh et al. (2021) Pisanti et al. (2021) Since all data are subject to known and unknown sources of uncertainties, it is of utmost importance for a rigorous analysis to devise a method taking these eﬀects into account, while introducing the least amount of bias. Prior to 2016, the statistical models used for analyzing D(p,γ)He data were exclusively based on some variant of the χminimization procedure outlined in D’Agostini (1994). Such models are also used in the recent works of Yeh et al. (2021); Pisanti et al. (2021). Chi-square minimizations make the implicit assumption that all sources of uncertainties entering the model can be described by Gaussian distributions, but this purely Gaussian assumption frequently does not apply in practice. For the case of thermonuclear reaction rates in general, one needs to consider statistical and systematic uncertainties. For both of these, the assumption of Gaussian statistics may be problematic, depending on the circumstances. For statistical eﬀects, Poissonian rather than Gaussian statistics may apply to low-eventrate data, while, for systematic eﬀects, lognormal statistics may be more appropriate than Gaussian statistics. The diﬀerences may or may not be small. But since Figure 2. (Top) S-factor ﬁt and data for D(p,γ)He. The two-parameter ﬁt function was S(E) = (Scale factor) × S (Oﬀset) MeVb, where Sdenotes the theoretical S-factor of Marcucci et al. (2005). The dark and light gray shaded bands correspond to 68 and 95 percentiles, respectively, of the predicted S-factor. Circles depict data for which we adopt absolute normalizations, while triangles refer to relative data. Displayed error bars refer to statistical uncertainties for the absolute data only. The gray-shaded region shows the Gamow peak at a temperature of T = 0.8 GK. (Bottom) Residuals of ﬁt or data with respect to the median (50 percentile) S-factor at each energy, i.e., ∆S/S ≡ (S (Tur21) Turkat et al. (2021); (Mos20) Mossa et al. (2020); (Tis19) Tišma et al. (2019); (Cas02) Casella et al. (2002); (Sch97) Schmid et al. (1997); (Ma97) Ma et al. (1997); (War63) Warren et al. (1963); (Bai70) Bailey et al. (1970); (Gri63) Griﬃths et al. (1963); (Gri62) Griﬃths et al. (1962); (Gri55) Griﬃths & Warren (1955). the overarching goal is to provide a reaction rate with the most reliable uncertainty, it is crucial to analyze the D(p,γ)He data using an independent method that does not make the implicit assumption of Gaussian statistics throughout. The ﬁrst step in this direction was made in the work of Iliadis et al. (2016) which analyzed D(p,γ)He data using a Bayesian hierarchical model (Hilbe et al. 2017). A Bayesian model is not restricted to Gaussian statistics, but allows for the implementation of any probability distributions that best describe the data at hand. Recently, such models have been applied successfully to estimate other BBN reaction rates (Gómez Iñesta et al. 2017; de Souza et al. 2019a,b, 2020). We will provide a discussion of our Bayesian model in Section 3. Fitting D(p,γ)He S-factor data requires the user to adopt a choice for the theoretical relationship between Sfactor and energy. In many previous works, e.g., Mossa et al. (2020); Yeh et al. (2021); Pisanti et al. (2021), a polynomial function was assumed for this relationship. Polynomial models have a number of advantages: a simple form, well-known properties, moderate ﬂexibility of shapes, and computational ease of use. However, they also have limitations: poor interpolatory and extrapolatory properties, a poor trade-oﬀ between degree and shape, and a disregard of nuclear theory. In extreme cases, these issues could lead to numerically unstable models. Figure 3. (Top) S-factor ﬁt and data for D(p,γ)He. The four-parameter ﬁt function was S(E) = S SEMeVb. The dark and light gray shaded bands correspond to 68 and 95 percentiles, respectively, of the predicted S-factor. Circles depict data for which we adopt absolute normalizations, while triangles refer to relative data. Displayed error bars refer to statistical uncertainties for the absolute data only. The gray-shaded region shows the Gamow peak at a temperature of T = 0.8 GK. (Bottom) Residuals of ﬁt or data with respect to the median (50 percentile) S-factor at each energy, i.e., ∆S/S ≡ (S− S)/S. For the data set key, see caption of Figure 2. A diﬀerent strategy was employed by Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016), who adopted, for the theoretical Sfactor, the predictions of a microscopic nuclear model. Their model had only a single open parameter, i.e., a scale factor by which nuclear theory was multiplied during the ﬁtting process. Their reasoning was that, while current microscopic nuclear models may be expected to reliably reproduce the energy dependence of the Sfactor, the absolute normalization should be determined by the experimental data. This method has a number of advantages over the use of polynomials: better interpolatory and extrapolatory properties, and fewer ﬁt parameters resulting in more stable models. The disadvantages are that the nuclear theoretical S-factor cannot be written as an analytical expression anymore, but must be computed numerically, and that a speciﬁc microscopic model may deviate from the true S-factor not only in scale, but also in energy dependence. Note that we are not claiming that one method is inherently better than the other. Since the goal is to predict the most reliable S-factor based on data, it is important to investigate any diﬀerences that are obtained with diﬀerent theoretical relationships between S-factor and energy. Therefore, we will construct Bayesian models for both a polynomial and a microscopic theory prescription. In the ﬁrst case, we follow Mossa et al. (2020); Yeh et al. (2021); Pisanti et al. (2021) and assume a cubic polynomial implying four ﬁt parameters, S, S, S, and S. For the second case, we will modify the procedure used in Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016). Microscopic cross section calculations represent model-based Hamiltonian approaches with a priori diﬃcult-to-quantify uncertainties. Bias in the microscopic theory S-factor may arise from the truncation of the set of states in the basis used to determine the matrix elements, or the exclusion of operators in the Hamiltonian. These issues cannot be entirely disregarded, despite the fact that these types of model calculations are usually tuned to experimental scattering data and binding energies. To allow for the possibility of bias in the microscopic theory S-factor, we will introduce two ﬁt parameters instead of one; a multiplicative scale factor, a, by which nuclear theory, S, is multiplied, similar to Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016), and an oﬀset, b, Our results will be of interest not only for the D(p,γ)He reaction rate, but also to assess the microscopic model Sfactor prediction (i.e., by how much the ﬁt results diﬀer from a = 1 and b = 0). For Swe adopt the numerical values of Marcucci et al. (2005), although more recent results have been published by the same group (Marcucci et al. 2016). The absolute magnitudes of the two theoretical predictions diﬀer by >7% near 91 keV (i.e., the center of the Gamow peak for 0.8 GK). However, we are only interested in the energy dependence, which agrees within 0.8% over the energy range of interest for BBN. We have veriﬁed that using one microscopic result over the other will give rise to diﬀerent values of the parameters a and b, but the ﬁtted S-factors agree within uncertainties. The hierarchical Bayesian model in the present work is similar to the one in Iliadis et al. (2016); de Souza et al. (2020). This model allows us to take all relevant eﬀects and processes into account impacting the measured data. The framework for Bayesian Inference rests on Bayes’ Theorem (Hilbe et al. 2017) where the data are represented by the vector y and the complete set of model parameters is described by the vector θ. All factors in Equation (3) serve as probability densities: L(y|θ) is the likelihood, i.e., the probability that the data, y, were obtained assuming given values of the model parameters, θ; π(θ) is the prior, which represents our state of knowledge about each parameter before seeing the data; the product of the likelihood and the prior deﬁnes the posterior, p(θ|y), i.e., the probability of obtaining the values of a speciﬁc set of model parameters given the data. The posterior represents an update to our prior state of knowledge about the model parameters once new data becomes available. The denominator, termed the evidence, is a normalization factor and is not pertinent toward the discussion of the present work. The astrophysical S-factor is related to the reaction cross section by S(E) ≡ Eeσ(E), where η is the Sommerfeld parameter. When the experimental S-factor is subject to statistical uncertainties only, σ, the likelihood is given by where S(θ)is the theoretical S-factor, given by Equation (1) or (2), and the product runs over all the data points, labeled by i. This likelihood represents a product of normal distributions, each with a mean of S(θ) and a standard deviation of σ, given by the experimental statistical uncertainty of datum i. In symbolic notation, we write the above expression as where “Normal” denotes a normal (Gaussian) probability density and the symbol “∼” means “has the probability distribution of.” In many cases, the observed scatter of the measured data cannot be explained solely by the reported statistical uncertainties, suggesting the presence of additional sources of statistical uncertainties unknown to the experimenter. We utilize the expression extrinsic uncertainty for describing such eﬀects (de Souza et al. 2019a). Since the observed scatter in the data points contains the information on any additional statistical uncertainties, our model can predict the magnitude of the extrinsic uncertainty for each data set. When both statistical and extrinsic uncertainties are present in a measurement, the overall likelihood is given by a nested (hierarchical) expression. Using symbolic notation, we can write Equations (6) and (7) provide an intuitive approach for constructing the overall likelihood: ﬁrst, statistical uncertainties, quantiﬁed by the standard deviation, σ, of a normal probability density, perturb the true (but unknown) value of the S-factor at the given energy of a data point i, S(θ), to produce a value of S; second, the latter value is perturbed, in turn, by the reported experimental statistical uncertainty, quantiﬁed by the standard deviation, σ, of a normal probability density, to produce the measured value of S. The above example demonstrates how experimental eﬀects impacting the data can be implemented into a Bayesian model. Each of the model parameters contained in the vector θ requires a prior. Priors are chosen to best represent the physics involved. For example, if our model includes a parameter, A, and all we know is that its value lies somewhere in a region from zero to A, we can write a prior as where “Uniform” denotes a uniform probability density. Instead of uniform priors, we will be using, for most parameters, normal probability densities with a large spread. These are non-informative, normalizable, and, unlike uniform priors, do not have sharp (unphysical) boundaries. As mentioned in Section 2.1 (see also Table 1), we divided the D(d,γ)He experiments into two groups, i.e., those with reliable absolute cross section normalizations (“absolute data”), and those for which we only utilize the energy dependence of the cross section (“relative data”). We discuss below the prior choices for these two groups in more detail. For the ﬁrst group (Warren et al. 1963; Ma et al. 1997; Schmid et al. 1997; Casella et al. 2002; Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020; Turkat et al. 2021), we adopted reported systematic uncertainties and included them as normalization factors into our model. For example, a systematic uncertainty of, say, ±5%, implies that the systematic factor uncertainty is 1.05. The true value of the normalization factor, f, is unknown at this stage. However, we do know that the expectation value of the normalization factor is unity. If not for this, we would have corrected the data for the systematic eﬀect. A useful distribution we employ for normalization factors is the lognormal probability density, which is characterized by two quantities: the location parameter, µ, and the spread parameter, σ. The median value of the lognormal distribution is given by x= e, while the factor uncertainty, for a coverage probability of 68%, is f.u. = e. We include in our Bayesian model a systematic eﬀect on the S-factor as an informative, lognormal prior with a median of x= 1.0 (or µ = ln x= 0), and a factor uncertainty given by the systematic uncertainty; i.e., in the above example, f.u. = 1.05 (or σ = ln f.u. = ln(1.05)). The prior is then explicitly given by where “LogNormal” denotes a lognormal probability density. For more information on this choice of prior, see Iliadis et al. (2016). For the six absolute data sets, we adopted for the factor uncertainties, f.u., the reported values of 1.14 (Turkat et al. 2021), 1.027 (Mossa et al. 2020), 1.10 (Tišma et al. 2019), 1.045 (Casella et al. 2002), 1.09 (Schmid et al. 1997), 1.09 (Ma et al. 1997), and 1.10 (Warren et al. 1963). More details are provided in Appendix A. For the relative data (Griﬃths & Warren 1955; Grifﬁths et al. 1962, 1963; Bailey et al. 1970), we chose to scale the true (unknown) S-factor by a factor of 10, with a non-informative prior of corresponding to a uniform prior between −1 and +1. In other words, the normalization factor, 10, is varied by up to one order of magnitude up or down during the sampling. Therefore, the relative data provide only information on the energy dependence of the S-factor, but none on the absolute normalization. Furthermore, it is not possible to extract reliable statistical uncertainties for these data, as is explained in more detail in Appendix A. Therefore, they will be subject only to extrinsic uncertainties, which are included in the likelihood according to Equation (6). For both absolute and relative data, the extrinsic uncertainties of the measured cross sections are inherently unknown to the experimenter. Thus, we will adopt broad normal priors that are truncated at zero, with a standard deviation of 10MeVb. Our complete Bayesian model is summarized below in symbolic notation: Model relationships: (1) S(E) = aS(E) + b (2) S(E) = S+ SE + SE+ SE Parameters: (1) θ ≡ (a, b) (2) θ ≡ (S, S, S, S) Likelihood (absolute data):(12) S∼ Normal(S, σ), S∼ Normal(S, σ). Likelihood (relative data): S∼ Normal(S, σ), Priors: σ∼ TruncNormal(0, [10MeVb]), f∼ LogNormal(0, [ln(f.u.)]), g∼ Uniform(−1, +1), The index i labels individual data points, j = 1, ..., 4 denotes the relative data sets with information on the energy dependence only, and k = 1, ..., 6 labels the absolute data sets that include information on the cross section normalizations. The “TruncNormal()” prior refers to a truncated normal probability distribution; i.e., a density with a maximum at zero that excludes negative values. For the analysis of Bayesian models, we employ the program JAGS (“Just Another Gibbs Sampler”) using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling (Plummer 2003). Speciﬁcally, we will employ the rjags package that works directly with JAGS within the R language (R Core Team 2020). Running a JAGS model refers to generating random samples from the posterior distribution of model parameters. This involves the deﬁnition of the model, likelihood, and priors, as well as the initialization, adaptation, and monitoring of the Markov chain. The MCMC sampling will provide the posteriors of all parameters. We computed three MCMC chains, where each had a length of 10steps after disregarding the burn-in samples (3 × 10steps for each chain). This ensured that the chains reached equilibrium and that Monte Carlo ﬂuctuations were negligible compared to statistical, systematic, and extrinsic uncertainties. Values of the physical model parameters are listed in Table 2. Our best-ﬁt S-factors using the two-parameter (nuclear theory) and four-parameter (polynomial) ﬁt functions (Section 2.3) are presented in the top panels of Figures 2 and 3, respectively. The bottom panels show the S-factor residuals of the ﬁt and the data. The gray-shaded region in the top panels depicts the Gamow peak for a temperature of T = 0.8 GK. The maximum of the peak occurs at 91 keV in the d + p center of mass, which is a useful energy for S-factor comparisons. For the two-parameter ﬁt we ﬁnd a value of S(91 keV) = (7.98 ± 0.17) × 10MeVb, where the uncertainties were derived from the 16, 50, and 84 percentiles (Table 2). The four-parameter (polynomial) ﬁt yields S(91 keV) = (7.99 ± 0.18) × 10MeVb, consistent with the two-parameter ﬁt. The marginalized posteriors from which these results were derived are depicted in the top panel of Figure 4. The solid blue and dashed red lines correspond to our two-parameter and four-parameter ﬁts, respectively. For comparison, the vertical black dotted line indicates the mean value of the four-parameter ﬁt result of Pisanti et al. (2021), which corresponds to S(91 keV) = 8.00 × 10MeVb (Table 2). It can be seen that their mean value is near the center of the posterior densities derived in the present work. Pisanti et al. (2021) did not directly report their S-factor uncertainties and, therefore, we cannot compare our results to theirs (see Appendix B). Numerical values of the parameters for the present and previous ﬁts are also listed in Table 2. Regarding our two-parameter ﬁt, recall from Section 2.3 that the values a = 1 and b = 0 correspond to a microscopic theory S-factor consistent with the data. One- and two-dimensional projections of the posterior probability distributions of the two parameters are depicted in Figure 5. The scale factor, a = 0.953 ± 0.024, diﬀers signiﬁcantly from unity, and the oﬀset, b = (2.2±1.0)×10, diﬀers from zero (see red dashed cross hairs in the central panel of Figure 5). Thus, it appears that both the absolute magnitude and the energy dependence of the S-factor predicted by the microscopic model of Marcucci et al. (2005) are in conﬂict with the available data. Posteriors of the normalization factors, f, for each of the experiments that reported absolute S-factors are displayed as red areas in Figure 6. These results were obtained with the present two-parameter ﬁt given in Figure 2. For comparison, the densities shown in gray depict the priors, with their spreads determined by the reported systematic uncertainties (see Section 3). Numerical values are listed in Table 3, indicating agreement between the results of the two- and four-parameter ﬁts. Recall that these values represent factors by which the true cross section is multiplied to agree with the data, as explained in Section 3. It can be seen that, with one exception, the priors and posteriors overlap signiﬁcantly, meaning that these works appear to have reported reliable systematic uncertainties. The exception is the data set of Turkat et al. (2021) with a normalization factor of f≈ 1.3, which signiﬁcantly exceeds their reported systematic uncertainty of ≈14%. This implies that our best ﬁt line is pulled only weakly towards this particular data set compared to the other data. The spread parameters of the extrinsic scatter, σ, are also listed in Table 3 for both our two- and fourparameter ﬁts. The values from both models are in agreement, and indicate that any unreported additional statistical scatter is either smaller or comparable in magnitude to the reported statistical uncertainties. The only exception is the data set of Schmid et al. (1997), for which we obtain an extrinsic scatter (σ ≈ 2.6 × 10MeVb) that signiﬁcantly exceeds their reported statistical uncertainties (≈ 1.0 × 10MeVb). (2.19±0.10)×102.12×10 (5.80±0.24)×105.97×10 (6.34)×105.46×10 (−2.20±0.52)×10−1.66×10 (7.99±0.18)×108.00×10 To assess how robust our S-factor ﬁts are to the data selection, we repeated the analysis by disregarding speciﬁc data sets. In the following, we will focus on the results obtained using the four-parameter ﬁt model. Although we will quote for these tests S-factor values at a representative center-of-mass energy of 91 keV only (i.e., at the center of the Gamow peak for a temperature of T = 0.8 GK), it must be emphasized that deuterium BBN takes place over a range of energies and that quantitatively diﬀerent results are obtained for diﬀerent energies. For the ﬁrst test, we disregarded the data measured by Mossa et al. (2020), which cover center-of-mass energies between 0.03 MeV and 0.3 MeV. The result is S(91 keV) = (7.81 ± 0.31) × 10MeVb. The corresponding probability density is depicted as dotted orange line in the lower panel of Figure 4. Disregarding the data of Mossa et al. (2020) not only lowers the mean S-factor at 91 keV by 2.3%, but also increases its uncertainty (from 2.2% to 4.0%), which can be seen by comparing the orange-dotted line to the blue or red lines in the top panel of Figure 4. The reason is that this data set has the smallest overall uncertainties (see Appendix A.11) among all the data we took into account (Table 2). Therefore, it pulls on the best-ﬁt S-factor more strongly than the other data. For the second test, we disregarded the data of Warren et al. (1963); Turkat et al. (2021). These two experiments provided the only absolute S-factors in the higher energy range (≈0.3 − 1.6 MeV). In this case, we obtained a value of S(91 keV) = (7.96 ± 0.18) × 10MeVb. The probability density, shown as dashed-dotted green line in the lower panel of Figure 4, is very close to the blue or red line in the top panel that take all data into account. This result conﬁrms that the data at higher energies have only a small impact on the predicted S-factor near an energy of 91 keV. Finally, we disregarded all relative data sets, i.e., those with a superscript “e” in column 2 of Table 1. The resulting S-factor value at 91 keV was the same as that obtained for the full data set. This behavior is expected because, again, the best-ﬁt S-factor is most strongly 0.917 (6.0)×10 (2.14)×10 ≤6.0×10 ≤9.8×10 (2.56)×10 ≤4.3×10 ≤2.2×10 (1.17)×10 (4.00)×10 ≤9.2×10 (3.42)×10 denotes the theoreti- EMeV b. pulled towards the data of Mossa et al. (2020) in this energy range. The thermonuclear reaction rate per particle pair, Nhσvi, at a given plasma temperature, T , is given by (Iliadis 2015) Figure 4. Marginalized posteriors of the S-factor at a representative center-of-mass energy of 91 keV; i.e., at the center of the Gamow peak for a temperature of T = 0.8 GK. (Top) Posteriors obtained with our two-parameter (solid blue) and four-parameter model (dashed red) Bayesian ﬁt (Section 2.3), including all eleven data sets listed with check marks in column 2 of Table 1. The solid blue and dashed red lines represent vertical slices at 91 keV of the ﬁts shown in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. For comparison, the vertical black dotted line depicts the mean value for the polynomial ﬁt of Pisanti et al. (2021). (Bottom) The dotted orange line corresponds to the posterior of our four-parameter model ﬁt obtained by excluding the data measured by Mossa et al. (2020), whereas the dashed-dotted green line indicates the posterior obtained by excluding the data measured by Warren et al. (1963); Turkat et al. (2021). where mis the reduced mass of projectile and target, Nis Avogadro’s constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, and E is the d + p center-of-mass energy. We computed the D(p,γ)He reaction rates by numerically integrating Equation (13). The S-factor is adopted from the samples of our Bayesian ﬁts (Section 4) and, thus, our values of Nhσvi fully contain the eﬀects of statistical, systematic, and extrinsic uncertainties. We base these results on 75,000 random S-factor samples, which ensures that Markov chain Monte Carlo ﬂuctuations are negligible compared to the reaction rate un- Offset (MeV b) Figure 5. One- and two-dimensional projections of the posterior probability distributions for the two physical model parameters of our two-parameter ﬁt (Section 4). The gray areas at the top and right depict the one-dimensional marginalized posteriors. The central panel indicates the 68%, 95%, and 99.7% credible intervals (dark, medium, and light blue, respectively), of the two-dimensional pairwise posterior projections. The red dashed cross hairs correspond to a scale factor of unity (a = 1) and an oﬀset of zero (b = 0). See Equation (2). certainties. Our lower and upper integration limits were set to 10MeV and 2.0 MeV, respectively. Reaction rates are computed for 54 diﬀerent temperatures between 0.001 GK and 4 GK. At these temperatures, the data shown in Figure 2 fully cover the astrophysically important energy range. Numerical values of the reaction rates for our two-parameter function are listed in Table 4. The recommended rates are computed from the 50th percentile of the probability density, while the factor uncertainty, f.u., is obtained from the 16th and 84th percentiles (Longland et al. 2010). Reaction rates are displayed in Figure 7. For better comparison, all rates have been divided by the median (50th percentile) values of our four-parameter ﬁt (Figure 3). Our low (16th percentile) and high (84th percentile) rates are shown as gray bands centered around unity in all four panels. The top left panel compares the results for the twoparameter (shown in magenta) and four-parameter ﬁts, both obtained in the present work. It can be seen that the rates agree within uncertainties. In other words, the choice of the particular ﬁt function, Equation (1) or Equation (2), is inconsequential for the derived reaction rates. It is also apparent that the uncertainties Figure 6. Marginalized posteriors (red) of the normalization factors, f, for each of the seven experiments that reported absolute S-factors. The results are obtained with the present two-parameter ﬁt displayed in Figure 2. The full circles, horizontal thick bars, and horizontal thin bars below each distribution show the median, and the 68% and 95% credible intervals, respectively. For comparison, the corresponding prior distributions are displayed in gray. For the data set labels, see Figure 2. of our four-parameter ﬁt rates (gray) increase towards both the low and high temperature ends. This is exactly what one would expect from a polynomial ﬁt function considering the lack of S-factor data beyond the lowenergy and high-energy cutoﬀs. This eﬀect, although less pronounced, is also visible in our two-parameter ﬁt rates (magenta). The bottom left panel compares our four-parameter ﬁt results with those of the previous evaluation of Iliadis et al. (2016) (magenta), which has been used in the BBN simulations of Pitrou et al. (2018). Although the gray and magenta bands overlap signiﬁcantly, some diﬀerences are apparent. At the lowest temperatures, T = 0.001 GK, the present recommended rates are higher by 3% while, at 4 GK, they are lower by 9%. Also, the present rates have on average smaller uncertainties (between 2.1% and 3.9%, depending on temperature) compared to the 2016 rates (3.7%). These diﬀerences are caused by the input information used to estimate the rates. First, only data up to center-of-mass energies of 200 keV were analyzed in Iliadis et al. (2016), while here we are using all data up to 2 MeV (Table 1). Second, the data of Turkat et al. (2021); Mossa et al. (2020); Tišma et al. (2019) were not available in 2016. In the top right panel, the magenta band depicts the rates of Mossa et al. (2020). At the low-temperature end, the previous rates have much smaller uncertainties (1.5%) compared to our results (3.9%), whereas at the high-temperature end their uncertainties (8%) are much larger than ours (2.5%). At the temperature most important for deuterium BBN nucleosynthesis, our uncertainties (2.2%) are slightly smaller than those of Mossa et al. (2020) (2.8%). These diﬀerences are surprising considering that the results represented by both the gray and magenta bands were obtained by using the same ﬁtting function; i.e., a third-degree polynomial. The bottom right panel presents the rates of Pisanti et al. (2021) as a magenta band. These results largely overlap with our rates in the temperature range important for BBN, but a number of interesting diﬀerences are apparent. First, our recommended four-parameter ﬁt rates are about 4% larger at the lowest temperatures compared to the previous results. Furthermore, notice that the uncertainties of the magenta band do not increase towards the low- and high-temperature boundaries, which is surprising considering that the results are based on a polynomial ﬁt function. By comparing the two magenta bands in the top right and bottom right panels, it can also be seen that the uncertainties of the rates by Mossa et al. (2020) and Pisanti et al. (2021) are quite diﬀerent. This comparison calls into question the statement in Pisanti et al. (2021) that “...the small diﬀerences with respect to the expansion of the S-factor reported in [Mossa et al.] are due to the inclusion of the data of [Tišma et al.].” We will comment in more detail on the S-factors of Mossa et al. (2020); Pisanti et al. (2021) in Appendix B. We reported on a comprehensive evaluation of the D(p,γ)He reaction rate, which impacts the synthesis of deuterium in the early universe. Recent studies (Coc et al. 2015; Pitrou et al. 2018; Iliadis & Coc 2020) hinted at a tension between the observed and predicted primordial deuterium abundance values. If conﬁrmed, this could have important implications pointing to physics beyond the standard model. Our study took into account the largest body of data (eleven diﬀerent experiments), spanning the time period of 1955–2021, including very recently published data (Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020; Turkat et al. 2021). All these data, including the reported statistical and systematic uncertainties, were carefully evaluated (Appendix A). The S-factor ﬁtting was performed using a Bayesian model, ﬁrst applied in Iliadis et al. (2016), which has several advantages compared to conventional χtechniques. First, the assumption of Gaussian probability densities, implicit in the conventional methods, can be relaxed and forms of probability densities that best suit the circumstances can be adopted. Second, the Bayesian model incorporates all relevant uncertainties in a rigorous manner, including additional sources of statistical scatter (“extrinsic uncertainties”), which were either unknown to, or unreported by, the experimenter. Fits were performed for two diﬀerent ﬁtting functions. One was based on microscopic nuclear theory and involved two physical model parameters. The second one was based on a cubic polynomial and was chosen to di- He reaction rates. rectly compare our results to those of previous studies that also employed polynomial ﬁtting functions. We found that our reaction rates derived using the twoparameter and four-parameter ﬁtting functions were in excellent agreement. In the temperature range most relevant for BBN (T = 0.1 − 1.0 GK), our D(p,γ)He rate uncertainties are between 2.1% and 2.5%. We compared our results to recently published reaction rates (Mossa et al. 2020; Pisanti et al. 2021). Compared to Mossa et al. (2020), our rates have larger uncertainties at 0.1 GK and smaller ones at 1 GK. As for the reason of these diﬀerences, we explored the possibility that Mossa et al. (2020) have disregarded the oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements in their covariance matrix. Compared to Pisanti et al. (2021), our reaction rates are in better agreement, although our rate uncertainties Figure 7. Thermonuclear reaction rates of D(p,γ)He, normalized to the median (50th percentile) values of our four-parameter ﬁt (Figure 3). These rates are shown in gray in all panels, while the results they are compared to are displayed in magenta. (Top left) Rates based on the present two-parameter ﬁt results. (Bottom left) Rates of Iliadis et al. (2016). (Top right) Rates of Mossa et al. (2020). (Bottom right) Rates of Pisanti et al. (2021). The present results and those of Iliadis et al. (2016) correspond to 68% coverage probabilities, while the uncertainties of Mossa et al. (2020); Pisanti et al. (2021) have been obtained from a χanalysis. The most important temperature for deuterium BBN is near 0.8 GK. based on a cubic polynomial S-factor exhibit a diﬀerent temperature dependence. Based on the new D(p,γ)He reaction rates from the present study, we conﬁrm the 1.8σ tension between the predicted and measured primordial D/H abundance ratio that was reported by Pitrou et al. (2021a,b). At this time, the most important remaining source of uncertainty in the predicted primordial D/H value is not the current D(p,γ)He rate uncertainty (Tab. 4), but the rate uncertainties of the D(d,n)He and D(d,p)H reactions. New measurements for those reactions in the energy range important for BBN would be highly desirable. We would like to thank Isabela Tišma for providing the numerical values listed in Table 9, Ofelia Pisanti for providing her reaction rates in tabular format, and Amy Nicholson for helpful comments on microscopic nuclear models. We would also like to express our appreciation to Robert Janssens for a thorough reading of the manuscript. This work was supported in part by NASA under the Astrophysics Theory Program grant 14-ATP14-0007, by the DOE, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of Nuclear Physics, under grants DE-FG02-97ER41041 (UNC) and DE-FG02-97ER41033 (TUNL), and by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No.DGE-1650116. The data sets analyzed in the most recent BBN studies are summarized in Table 1. Our main selection criterion was to only consider data below a center-of-mass energy of 2.0 MeV. Since deuterium synthesis occurs at BBN energies between 20 keV and 300 keV, the data at energies in excess of 2.0 MeV are irrelevant for the considerations of the present work. Experiments that reported data below 2.0 MeV are listed in the ﬁrst column of Table 1. In total, we took into account 10 independent measurements, more than any other BBN study. We disregarded the data from three experiments (Wölﬂi et al. 1967; Geller et al. 1967; Bystritsky et al. 2008), and we will explain our reasons below. Regarding the data that we adopted in our analysis, six experiments provided information on both statistical and systematic uncertainties (Warren et al. 1963; Schmid et al. 1997; Ma et al. 1997; Casella et al. 2002; Tišma et al. 2019; Mossa et al. 2020). To this body of data we add the older results of Griﬃths & Warren (1955); Griﬃths et al. (1962, 1963); Bailey et al. (1970). Since these data sets either provide no uncertainties at all or only total uncertainties, we implemented them differently into our Bayesian model compared to the other sets, as explained in the main text. Comments on individual experiments will be provided below. A.2. Data of Griﬃths & Warren (1955) The absolute cross section normalization at a bombarding energy of 1.0 MeV is given as 50%. In addition to this large value, the cross sections were calculated using outdated stopping powers from the early 1950’s. The relative yield data, without error bars, are displayed in their Fig. 10. The text states that “no errors have been shown since the statistical errors are less than other experimental errors.” No other information can be extracted regarding their statistical or systematic uncertainties. Cross section data are not shown in their paper, but are presented as open circles (without uncertainties) in Fig. 6 of Griﬃths et al. (1962). Note that those open circles have been normalized to the cross section of Griﬃths et al. (1962). We scanned the ﬁgure, extracted energies and cross sections, and converted them to center-of-mass energies and S-factors. Numerical values are presented in Table 5. We implemented these results into our Bayesian model by treating them as relative S-factors only (see main text). The absolute cross sections were obtained in Griﬃths et al. (1962) by using outdated stopping powers from Table 5. Data of Griﬃths & Warren (1955). the 1950’s. Only combined cross section uncertainties are presented in their Table I and Figure 6 (solid circles). From the published information, it is not possible to extract statistical or systematic uncertainties separately. The cross section data were converted to centerof-mass energies and S-factors by Coc et al. (2015) and the results are listed in their Table VI. We implemented these results into our Bayesian model by treating them as relative S-factors only (see main text). Griﬃths et al. (1963) obtained absolute cross sections by using outdated stopping powers from the 1950’s. Yields, cross sections, and S-factors are presented in their Table I and Figures 5 and 6, respectively. The displayed error bars represent combined uncertainties, and it is not possible to extract statistical or systematic uncertainties separately. They state in the text that “The statistical errors alone are of the order of the deviations from the mean line,” but present no numerical values. Their S-factors are listed in Table VI of Coc et al. (2015). We implemented these results into our Bayesian model by treating them as relative S-factors only (see main text). Warren et al. (1963) measured the inverse reaction, He(γ,p)D, at three diﬀerent energies. The γ-ray energies and cross sections listed in their Table II are reproduced in columns 1 and 2 of Table 6. Using the reciprocity theorem, we calculated the energies in the p + d center of mass and the S-factors for the forward reaction, D(p,γ)He. The values obtained are given in columns 3, 4, and 5 of Table 6. In their Table II, Warren Table 6. Data of Warren et al. (1963). et al. (1963) also provide statistical uncertainties (which they call “experimental errors”) and total uncertainties (which they call “total probable errors”). We have calculated the systematic uncertainties for their four data points from the squared diﬀerence of these values, yielding 11%, 3.6%, 15%, and 6.3%. In our Bayesian model, we will adopt an average value of 10% for the systematic uncertainty. Bailey et al. (1970) display cross sections in their Figure 1. They provide little information regarding the details of their analysis. Certainly, their absolute cross section scale rests on outdated stopping powers from the pre-1970’s. We scanned their ﬁgure, extracted energies and cross sections, and converted them to centerof-mass energies and S-factors. Numerical values are presented in Table 7. We implemented these results into our Bayesian model by treating them as relative S-factors only (see main text). Table 8. Data of Schmid et al. (1997). The S-factor was scanned from Figure 9 (triangles) in Ma et al. (1997) and the values were reported in Table IV of Coc et al. (2015). Ma et al. (1997) state that “The systematic uncertainty for the cross sections is estimated to be ±9%, and includes the estimated errors in stopping power, detector eﬃciency, γ-ray angular distribution assumptions, and beam current integration.” We calculated the cross section by multiplying the A values listed in Table II of Schmid et al. (1997) by 4π. The uncertainties reported in their Table I are of statistical nature only. The authors state that their systematic uncertainty is 9%. Our derived center-of-mass energies and S-factors are listed in Table 8. The low-energy LUNA data by Casella et al. (2002) are presented in their Table I, where only statistical uncertainties are listed. The quoted systematic uncertainties range from 3.6% at the highest measured energy to 5.3% at the lowest one. We adopt 4.5% for the average systematic uncertainty. The measurement of Tišma et al. (2019) took place at the Joižef Stefan Institute of Ljubljana after the publication of Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016). Tišma et al. (2019) measured the D(p,γ)He diﬀerential cross section at two angles and four energies from E= 97 to 210 keV, well within the BBN energy range. The angular distribution was consistent with theory (Marcucci et al. 2016), allowing for the extraction of total cross sections and S-factors. The results listed in Table 9 were provided to us directly by the authors. For the systematic uncertainties, they estimated a value of 10%. The measurement of Mossa et al. (2020) took place at the LUNA-400 kV accelerator after the publication of Coc et al. (2015); Iliadis et al. (2016). The experimental setup consisted of a windowless deuterium gas target and two HPGe detectors. Measured energies, S-factors, and uncertainties are reported in their Extended Data Table 1. Their reported systematic uncertainties are less than 2.7% at all energies. Recently, a measurement (Turkat et al. 2021) was performed at the 3 MV Tandetron accelerator of the Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf. The proton beam energies ranged from 400 to 1650 keV (or 265 to 1094 keV in the center of mass). Unlike the experiment of Mossa et al. (2020), they used solid targets (titanium deuteride). Gamma-rays were detected by two HPGe detectors placed at 55and 90. Their S-factors can be found in Table II of Turkat et al. (2021), together with statistical and systematic uncertainties. Their absolute normalization is subject to a reported global uncertainty of 12%, with additional scaling uncertainties of 5% or 8% depending on the target (see Table III in Turkat et al. (2021)). We implemented their data into our Bayesian model assuming an overall systematic uncertainty of 14%. Wölﬂi et al. (1967) measured the D(p,γ)He cross section at laboratory proton energies between 2 MeV and 12 MeV. Only three of their data points pertain to center-of-mass energies below 2 MeV. We decided to disregard these data points for the following reasons. The cross sections are shown in their Figure 5, but no numerical values are reported. From their ﬁgure it is apparent that the scatter of the data points is much less than the size of the displayed error bars, implying that systematic errors dominate the total uncertainties. It is not possible to derive statistical and systematic uncertainties separately, based on the information presented in their publication. Geller et al. (1967) reported only diﬀerential cross sections measured at 90. Results are displayed in their Figure 2, but no numerical values are presented in tables. Seven of their data points are located below a center-of-mass energy of 2 MeV. They state that the absolute cross section scale “is obtained by normalizing the gamma-ray yield” to a theoretical prediction (i.e., Gunn-Irving model). Little information is given about the meaning of the displayed error bars, and it is not possible to extract statistical and systematic uncertainties reliably. While we could have implemented these data points into our Bayesian model by treating them as relative S-factors, we decided to disregard these results. Taking them into account would have required us to introduce additional assumptions and uncertainties for angular distribution corrections. In previous analyses (Coc et al. 2015; Iliadis et al. 2016), the low-energy data from Table 3 of Bystritsky et al. (2008) were used because both statistical and systematic uncertainties (<8%) were reported. However, the statistical uncertainties are rather large (≈30%). Furthermore, electron screening could be important at these very low energies, depending on the target used. The same group followed up on their 2008 experiment with measurements over a wider energy range, with higher statistics, and diﬀerent types of targets (Bystritsky et al. 2014a,b, 2015). Unfortunately, these latter works provide no information on statistical or systematic uncertainties. Furthermore, they found that the cross section is aﬀected by electron screening when titanium deuteride is used as a target, but no eﬀect was observed with zirconium deuteride or a frozen DO target. Because this issue remains unresolved at this time, we disregarded these data. Zylstra et al. (2020) reported on an experiment performed at the OMEGA laser facility, which produced an inertially conﬁned plasma of a H and D mixture. They measured γ rays from the D(p,γ)He reaction and neutrons from the D(d,n)He reaction, and determined from the reaction yields the ratio of reactivities (i.e., the Maxwellian-averaged cross sections). Their extracted Sfactor is S = 0.429 ± 0.026(stat) ± 0.072(sys) eVb at E= 16.35 ± 0.40 keV. Even though this technique is promising, it does not represent a direct measurement of the S-factor or cross section. The S-factor value had to be unfolded from the measured reactivity, assuming that the plasma temperature can be accurately determined from the neutron spectrum. In addition, the extracted value does not represent an independent absolute S-factor measurement, because it was determined relative to the D(d,n)He S-factor of Bosch & Hale (1992). Therefore, we do not include this single data point in the analysis. Mossa et al. (2020) provide their S-factor, including uncertainties, in their Equations (2) and (3), (∆S(E))=(1.4 × 10+ 2.97 × 10E with the center-of-mass energy given in units of kilo electron volts. Their fractional S-factor uncertainty, ∆S/S, is depicted by the blue dashed lines in Figure 8. For comparison, our results using the four-parameter ﬁt function are displayed as the gray band (68% coverage probability), which is the same as the one shown in Figure 3. The reaction rate in the Extended Data Table 2 of Mossa et al. (2020) can be reproduced by integrating these equations and is displayed in Figure 2 of Pitrou et al. (2021a). The data sets taken into account in the ﬁts of Mossa et al. (2020) and Pisanti et al. (2021) are almost identical, except that the latter work considered in addition the data of Tišma et al. (2019). Speciﬁcally, Pisanti et al. (2021) state that their inclusion of the data of Tišma et al. (2019) (see Table 1) yields only small differences in the S-factor compared to the results given in Mossa et al. (2020). The mean S-factor of Pisanti et al. (2021) is given by with the energy in mega electron volts, and is indeed very similar to the mean S-factor of Mossa et al. (2020) (see Equation (B1)). Pisanti et al. (2021) did not report their S-factor uncertainties directly, but provided their covariance matrix, given by cov(S, S) = Figure 8. Relative S-factor uncertainty obtained using a cubic polynomial ﬁt function. (Gray band) Result of present four-parameter ﬁt function, i.e., the same result as shown in the lower panel of Figure 3. (Blue dashed lines) Result of Mossa et al. (2020), according to Equation (B2), which most likely disregards the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix (see text). Notice that the diagonal elements are very close in value to the coeﬃcients of Equation (B2). Considering the near numerical equality in the mean S-factors of Mossa et al. (2020) and Pisanti et al. (2021) (Equations (B1) and (B3), respectively), this indicates that the S-factor presented in Mossa et al. (2020) most likely did not take into account the oﬀ-diagonal terms in the covariance matrix (i.e., they seem to have disregarded the correlations between the polynomial coeﬃcients, S). Also, notice that it is not clear how to extract S-factor uncertainties from the information reported in Pisanti et al. (2021).