In recent years NASA has established policies designed to encourage development of and participation in open source software (OSS). However, confusion over OSS requirements has sometimes led to problems. Stakeholders including grant applicants and reviewers, legal teams, software developers, and software users all have diﬀerent understandings of what they think qualiﬁes as OSS, and these diﬀerences can lead to confusion about what is r equired to satisfy OSS requ irements. Im proving clarity within NASA and among NASA stakeholders as to the meaning of OSS and related terms would improve NASA’s ability to assess compliance with requirements related to OSS. This would also increase fairness in the solicitation p rocess, by establishing clear expectations arou nd software licensing. In th e software community the term “open source” refers to software whose source code is distributed publicly under a license that satisﬁes a set of criteria designed to ensure that the software can be freely used, modiﬁed, and shared. These criteria are laid out in the open source deﬁnition provided by the Open Source Initiative (OSI) [1]. OSS that satisﬁes the slightly more stringent deﬁnition of “free software” from the Free Software Foundation (FSF) [2] is sometimes called “free/libre and open source software” (FLOSS or FOSS) [3, 4]. Both deﬁnitions are quite detailed in order to address various issues that have come up with software licenses over the years. Some NASA policies also mention a subset of OSS licenses called “permissive” licenses [5]. A “permissive” license is an open source license that allows the creation of proprietary derivative works (as opposed to a “copyleft” license that requ ires derivative wor k s use the same license as the original) [6, 7]. Some NASA documents and policies have acknowledged the OSI and FSF deﬁnitions as widely accepted [5, 8], but NASA does not always use and apply th ese deﬁnitions consistently. Moreover, many scientists mistakenly understand the term “open source” to mean s im ply that source code is available to the public. As a result, some software products developed by scientists are advertised as “open source” even th ou gh their licenses violate one or more of the ten criteria of the OSI deﬁnition. Common examples include licenses that prohibit sale of the software (violating criterion #1, “Free redistribution,” which requires in part that the license allow sale of the software as part of an aggregate product) [1], or that prohibit commercial use (violating criterion #6, “No discrimination against ﬁelds of endeavor”). Mislabeling software as open source when it does not meet the OSI or FSF deﬁnitions can encourage violations of non-OSS licenses. Users and developers who are told that a software p roduct is OSS may choose to us e or develop the software on the assumption that the software license complies with the OSI and/or FSF deﬁnition. The developer may have greater diﬃculty enforcing the license terms as a result. U.S. Naval Research LaboratoryTechnical University of Denmark (former)Independent researcher The software community has speciﬁc deﬁnitions for terms such as “open source softwar e,” “free software,” and “permissive license,” but scie ntists proposing software development eﬀorts to NASA are not always knowledgeable about these deﬁnitions. Misunderstandings about the meaning of these terms can result in problems of fairness with solicitations, because s c ientists who interpret the terms diﬀerently than NASA intends may either needlessly limit the scope of their proposed work, or unwittingly propose work that does not comply with software licensing requirements. It is ther e fore recommended that NASA adopt deﬁnitions of the above terms that are in line with softwar e community usage, that these deﬁnitions be communicated as par t of solicitations to ensure a common understanding, and that proposals be required to identify what softwar e licens e s the proposers expect to use. Users may invest time and eﬀort into the software b ased on the understanding that it is OSS, only to read the license later and ﬁnd it un suitable to their purposes. Inconsistent or confusing licensing can mislead users and harm the reputation of both the developer and NASA. Having a common understanding of what is meant by terms like “open source” would reduce these kinds of problems. Although source code availability can be beneﬁcial by itself, software that does not fully meet both the OSI and FSF deﬁnitions misses out on many of the advantages of OSS. License restrictions that satisfy only the OSI deﬁnition have been identiﬁed as a b arrier to adoption for NASA-developed software [9, 10, 11]. These restrictions have resulted in some software products being rejected for packaging in Linux distributions [12, 13]. A simple way to avoid these k inds of problems is to use one of the licenses already approved by both OSI and FSF [11, 14], rather than tr y ing to write a custom license. Some U.S. government programs have taken the approach of requiring OSI-approved licenses for developed software [9]. In NASA solicitations that include an OSS requirement, misunderstandings around terms such as “open source” and “p er missive” can cause fairness issues. Proposal teams that interpret the OSS requirements more strictly than NASA does may limit the scope of their proposed work as a result, putting themselves at a d isad vantage relative to other teams. On the other hand, p roposal teams that interpret th e OSS requirements more loosely than NASA d oes may ﬁn d their proposals rejected. If NASA were to adopt the OSI and FSF deﬁn itions and state in solicitations that these deﬁn itions apply, this would make clearer to proposal teams wh at is required to comply with policies. A related problem is that proposal teams may commit generally to open source development, but without specifying what license they plan to use. If the p roposal team uses a looser deﬁnition of “open source” than NASA does, they might write a proposal that appears to be in compliance, when the team in fact plans to use a software license that is not consistent with the standards expected by NASA. If the license applies to third party software, the proposal team might not have the authority to change it. This situation could create problems for both NASA and the proposal teams, which might not become apparent until after the work has begun. Establishing common ground as to the meaning of terms related to OSS, and increasing clarity of communications around software licensing, would beneﬁt NASA and NASA-funded scientists. To ensure a common understanding around terms related to OSS, and to simplify assessment of OSS-related requirements , it is recommended that NASA do the follow ing: 1. Explicitly adopt deﬁnitions for “open source” and “permissive” that are in line with 2. Include deﬁnitions of “open source,” and “permissive ” in solicitations where these terms 3. Provide clear guidance when NASA has licensing requirements that diﬀer from the the deﬁnitions provided by OSI and FSF. This clariﬁes NASA’s intent wh en using these terms. Aligning NASA’s usage with that of the software community reduces the chances of misunderstandings. are used. This ensures that p roposers are aware of NASA’s intended meaning when these terms are used, and reduces the chances that a proposer will unwittingly rely on a diﬀerent d eﬁnition. standard deﬁnition of “open source.” In some solicitations NASA may choose to require that sour ce code be freely distributed, but not require full compliance with the OSI or FSF deﬁnitions. For instance, NASA m ight allow “noncommercial” licenses or ones that restrict sales. In such cases, the solicitation s hould specify what kinds of license terms will be allowed or disallowed. 4. Require proposals include a list of software products the team e xpects t o create or 5. Encourage the use of OSI or FSF approved licenses rather than custom licenses. Making clearer and more consistent communications about open source licensing would place NASA in a leadership position within the U.S. government in terms of open source software policy, since other agencies currently also exhibit inconsistencies in this area [9]. Better communications about licensing in solicitations will increase fairness in the selection process, and clarify expectations once projects are underway. Aligning NASA’s usage of software licensing terms with those of the software commu nity will help redu ce confusion at the solicitation p hase between proposers, reviewers, an d NASA. Although NASA might not require open source development in every case, this ensures that what NASA claims as open source will be accepted as such ou tside NASA. Encouraging the use of OSI and FSF approved licenses will reduce barriers to adoption of NASA-funded software outside the agency by making it easier for outside users and developers to understand and accept the license terms . This will enable greater involvement of outside developers and increase the availability of the software to users by enabling third party distribution. Both NASA and the nation will beneﬁt as a result. Thanks to Meghan Burleigh for her assistance in the editing process. modify, and t he expe cted license for each. This enables NASA to better assess whether software licensing requirements have been met. This reduces the eﬀort required to assess compliance, by reducing the need to read each license, and lowers barriers to adoption of software outsid e NASA. It may also reduce the eﬀort required by proposers, by reminding them that they can choose an existing license rather than writing their ow n.