<title>Design Theory to improve health evidence retrieval </title> <title>Alvet Miranda and Shah Jahan Miah </title> <title>ABSTRACT </title> Objective: Our study objective is to design a feasible technology solution for health  organizations to remove barriers to evidence-based clinical information retrieval, and  improve Evidence-Based Practice.  Methods:  Literature  from 2010  to  2020  was  reviewed  to  define problems  in  evidence-based clinical information retrieval with recommendations from literature  used to define solution objectives. Design Science Research is used to complete three  projects  in a research stream  using cloud  services such as Web-Scale  Discovery,  Content Management System, Federated Access,  Global  Knowledgebase,  and  Document Delivery. Design thinking, systems thinking, and user-oriented theory of  information need are adopted to construct a design theory.  Results:  The  research stream produced three  novel and innovative  artefacts:  a  contextual model,  a unified architecture,  and  a  context aware unified architecture  which we evaluate as part of academic reviews, scholarly publications, and conference  proceedings in various research stream stages. A fourth artefact or design theory is  presented to generalize results as mature knowledge.  Conclusion:  Design theory provides  practical  knowledge  for health sciences  libraries to source existing  cloud services or components and  integrate  them  as  a  holistic solution at  their  health  organizations.  Design theory also contributes to  academic knowledge by addressing pain points and ‘call to action’ identified during  literature review.  Keywords: Design Science Research, Information Need, Evidence-Based Practice,  Health Sciences Libraries, Design Thinking, Systems Thinking, Design Theory,  Information Retrieval, User-oriented Information Need.  <title>INTRODUCTION  </title> Eight pain points  or  problems  to  accessing  online  clinical  information  were identified in  a  commentary titled “Why are they not accessing  it? User barriers to clinical information access”  (Laera et al., 2021). These pain points (Figure 1)  comprise  time,  access,  awareness,  financial  limitations,  paywalls,  integration,  resource  scope,  and  resource  platforms.    Each was  identified by participants at a summit including  publishers and health sciences  librarians  who  manage  their organization’s online evidence  resources.  A  ‘call to action’  was made to industry members and health sciences  librarians  to  contribute mitigations to remove barriers to online information retrieval.  This identification of pain points to accessing evidence-based clinical information is  consistent with academic  literature  over  10  years  (2010-2020)  that discusses the  need  to  improve  Evidence-Based-Practice  (EBP)  in  healthcare  organizations.  EBP  comprises  patient  values,  clinical  expertise,  and  research  evidence,  with  access  to  clinical information being  essential  for clinicians to deliver patient care, conduct  research, and to fill in knowledge gaps (Miranda & Miah, 2019).   Purpose and Scope  Our objective is to improve  EBP in health  organizations by  removing barriers to  clinical information retrieval. We target the research evidence component of EBP and  use pain points  to define  problems.  A  survey of  439 nurses and physicians from  public and private hospitals reported clinician’s patient care improved when online  clinical information (Lialiou et al., 2016). While use of online evidence-based systems  are associated with Point-of-Care and Clinical Decision Support Systems, the survey  results  highlighted  a different  use case  that involves  writing scientific manuscripts  and filling knowledge gaps. The former associated with clinical expertise and patient  values components of EBP, and the latter supports research evidence.  Healthcare as  a traditional industry is generally resistant to change and innovative  practices with issues around information security, quality of care and privacy drawing  worldwide attention  (Maria & Shah, 2019).  We  aim  to  propose a design theory  or  generalized knowledge  to facilitate implementation of systems by health sciences  librarians through the  sourcing  and integration of existing  cloud services  in  a  way  that addresses these pain points in an iterative and incremental manner for effective  change management.  Research Background  Review of literature (2010-2020) regarding barriers to clinical informational retrieval  and  ‘call to action’  to improve  research evidence identified issues  and  theoretical  solutions to solve this ‘wicked’ (sensu Rittel and Webber) problem (Rittel & Webber,  1984). While attempts have been made to solve pain points in fragments (Miranda &  Miah, 2021),  no evidence  of  a holistic solution that  addresses  all  pain points  is  known.  A  research design that enables  health organizations to  reconfigure existing  systems to address pain points is required, which of course raises several questions:  1) do underlying theories exist that could be adopted to remove the barriers to clinical  information;  2) what systems are used by health organizations  to facilitate clinical  information retrieval; and 3), could these systems be (feasibly) reconfigured by health  sciences libraries in their respective organizations to remove barriers?  We  took an iterative and incremental approach to solving  these  problems  and  designed three novel and innovative artefacts  that were combined to produce  a  holistic solution. We designed and evaluated artefacts in a research stream consisting  of three projects  (A, B and C).  We based evaluations  on  the  FEDS framework  (Venable et al., 2016) that offers four different strategies which dictate the scope of  formative and summative evaluations either as artificial or naturalistic depending on  an artefact’s environment.  Project A focused on answering the first research question, to identify and adopt the  theory  of information need for information  retrieval  (Cole, 2011)  discussed  in the  Methods section.  The  designed  artefact was  a  user-oriented information retrieval  contextual  model  using  WSD  to  address the  time,  resource scope,  and  resource  platforms  pain points  (Miranda & Miah, 2019).  The model used filters or facets  available in a WSD service, which were pre-set to apply context. Context allowed presetting a group context which could be done by librarians. Clinicians unfamiliar with  the system could select or adopt a group context to get start and then define their own  context settings as their system familiarity matured.  Usefulness of the context model was evaluated  by  interviewing clinicians and  conducting content analysis of results  at a confirmatory focus group in line with  ethics approval for  university  level research. Project A results  were  compiled  as a  research  article and  published in a  peer-reviewed  open-access  medical  journal  (Miranda & Miah, 2019).  Project B  addressed the  second  question and  designed  a unified library  services  architecture  to  integrate  cloud  services  in health organizations  to  solve the access,  paywall,  integration, and awareness pain points.  All  library  systems  at  a  national  medical  institute  were identified and classified  as  one of resource provider  or  resource facilitator.  The  resulting architecture used a CMS  as a front-end and  integrated  WSD,  Global  Knowledgebase,  Link  Resolver and Document  Delivery  (inter-library loan) via Application  Programming Interface  (API)  for a unified  user  experience. The  architecture was  evaluated as useful by the library manager of the  medical institution and  a national conference  review  panel. The results were  published as a book chapter after presentation at an annual national medical libraries  conference in 2019 on site in New Delhi, India (Miranda, 2019).  Project C combined the two previous artefacts as a context aware unified architecture  offering a holistic solution (Miranda, 2020) to answer the third question. The context  aware unified architecture was first  demonstrated  to  and  then  evaluated by an  academic panel.  We  then  adopted  a  multiple  case studies method  for further  evaluation  by conducting in-depth interviews  (Hevner et al., 2004)  with  library  managers at three different health organizations.   Case study research is well suited for information systems implementations when the  context is important. A three-cluster framework for case study strategies was used to  select the literal replication multi case design (Shakir, 2002) with three or four cases  considered adequate  for  snowball (referrals by people interested in a  case) or  opportunistic (follow leads from field work) strategies.  We targeted health organizations  as  the natural environment for the designed  architecture. Managers directly overseeing library services were identified as sources  for data through in-depth interviews - one of the best means of informing case studies  (Jafari Sadeghi et al., 2019).   The selection process was initiated by inviting  participants  (health  sciences  librarians)  at  the national medical conference  during presentation of Project B  to  contribute to future research. Three organizations were selected through leads from  the conference (opportunistic selection).  One of the  selected  library  managers  had  attended the conference presentation and another two leads were selected by referral  from conference attendees (snowball selection).  On-location meetings were arranged by email including an overview of research and  participation scope along with information on ethics approvals for consent to record  the interviews for subsequent transcription purposes.  Prior to recording any  interview on the day, the research scope and ethics were explained again to proceed  with the library manager’s  consent.  An  overview of the artefact architecture  and a  walkthrough of the architecture’s instantiation were provided, inviting discussion for  their specific case. Following the interview, recordings were transcribed, and scripts  were imported into NVIVO for thematic  analysis.  Interviews were semi-structured with an agenda item to demonstrate the artefact and  discussion during and after demonstration. This provided us with an opportunity to  explore (Asher et al., 2013) and improve the artefact.  Results and outcomes from Project C were presented to librarians and online content  providers  at an  international  conference  virtually  in 2020  as  plans for onsite  presentation in London, UK were disrupted due to the COVID-19 pandemic. An open  access  copy  of  presentation slides and video  recording  were  made  available  online  after the conference (Miranda, 2020).   In addition,  results were prepared as a research article and published in a peerreviewed journal (Miranda & Miah, 2021).  Findings of the context aware unified  architecture  were  presented  following the outline  of  Gregor and Hevner  to  communicate  and present Design  Science  Research  (DSR)  for maximum impact  (Gregor & Hevner, 2013). DSR contributions for publication range from specific, to  limited  to more abstract knowledge  covering the spectrum of instantiations,  constructs, methods, models,  and design theories.  According to Gregor’s taxonomy  the research output is an architecture that formalizes knowledge or theory for design  and action on how to do something (Gregor, 2006).   Baskerville et. al. (Baskerville et al., 2018)  distinguishes knowledge  contributions  between science and technology with the  goal  of science being  to grow descriptive  knowledge, and technology to grow prescriptive knowledge of designed artefacts. We  lean  towards technology producing  a prescriptive design theory for  knowledge  contribution in publication. While each of the three artefacts was evaluated as useful  in  its  own right,  the  implementation was based on  an  operational architecture  or  technological rules  for  health  sciences  libraries.  We present well-developed  implementation principles as mature and generalized knowledge in this paper.  <title>METHODS </title> The  role of DSR is to identify  problems,  problem  context,  the audience  and then  iteratively and incrementally design an artifact for that audience to use as a solution.  Significant rigor is applied during artefact design, and its instantiations are evaluated  against requirements and results communicated to the scholarly body of knowledge  or  industry professionals  (Johannesson & Perjons, 2014).  DSR has proven  to an  effective research paradigm providing a new way of thinking  in terms of making  information systems design research relevant to practitioners (Genemo et al., 2016).   Artefacts from DSR can take many forms at varying levels: instantiations (software or  process)  are  considered  level 1,  where an  artefact is implemented;  level  2 artefacts  comprise constructs, methods, models and design principles produced as operational  principles or architectures; and level 3 artefacts are more well-developed theories of  embedded phenomena and take the form of design theories (Gregor & Hevner, 2013)  which is the focus of this paper.  Construction of design theories requires instantiations to present a working artefact,  either as a prototype or implementation with more  complete,  abstract and mature  knowledge derived from more specific, less mature and limited knowledge forms  (Gregor & Jones, 2007).   Our research progressed in a research stream (Baskerville et al., 2018), comprising of  three  DSR projects  that produced publication opportunities  due to their novel and  innovative artefact output.  Each  project informed  the next,  following  a  trajectory  from specific instantiations of artefacts to artefacts as a model, and then artefacts as  information system  architectures.  Results of these  three artefacts in the research  stream inform our design theory in line with DSR which in addition to being a  methodology to develop artefacts to solve problems also enables researchers to learn  from solutions (Miah et al., 2019a).  Each project used the Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) (Peffers et al.,  2008)  to  design  artefacts  with  methods  such as systems thinking  (Kasser & Zhao,  2016)  and design thinking  (Corral & Fronza, 2018)  being added  as the projects  became progressively more complex, complete and mature in knowledge. We build  on previous DSR projects and present  a design theory  by  developing  its  anatomy  (Gregor & Jones, 2007), comprising  of purpose and scope  covered previously  with  subsequent sections presenting principles of form and function, artefact mutability,  testable propositions,  justificatory knowledge,  principles of implementation and  expository instantiation.  This explicit attention to theory goes beyond solution  development  and provides contribution to knowledge  for defined health  organizational problems (Miah et al., 2019b).  Justificatory Knowledge  Justificatory knowledge is “the underlying knowledge or theory from the natural or  social or design sciences that gives a basis and explanation for the design (kernel  theories)”  (Piirainen & Briggs, 2011).  While we use  design  thinking  to  prototype  a  solution using DSRM  the artefact design was grounded in  the  theories  of: systems  thinking,  and  a theory of information need for information retrieval  that connects  information to knowledge (Cole, 2011).  Systems Thinking is “a set of synergistic analytic skills used to improve the  capability of identifying and understanding systems, predicting their behaviours,  and devising modifications to them in order to produce desired effects. These skills  work together as a system.”  (Arnold & Wade, 2015).  Health  sciences libraries in  organizations  use many systems,  the  use  of which,  including  optimization,  can be  quite siloed and unaligned to its larger organizational purpose (Miranda, 2019).   Systems  Thinking allows  us to identify  most  systems used by libraries,  their  interconnections and align them to achieve a common purpose to improve  information retrieval  holistically  instead of via multiple  fragmented systems.  Different systems are treated as components or elements of a larger system, which we  optimize by removing complexity in their inter-connections and configuration.  The premise of a theory of information need is rooted in the 1968 paper by Robert S.  Taylor who foresaw (Taylor, 2015) the role of information centres as they would take  on a new form at organizations, or these information centres would gradually make  the transition from reliance on people to reliance on systems to gather knowledge.  Our research designed the artefact around eight information need concepts grouped  by  Cole C. into three categories  of Information  Behaviours,  Context and Human  Condition (Cole, 2011).  This theory of information need for information  retrieval  reveals systems designed with a computer-science approach are inadequate, and that  a  system design should use a user-oriented  knowledge formulation/acquisition  approach.  The two kernel  theories  described  above  are  connected by  the  human condition  category which requires a holistic approach to understanding the user environment  to design user-oriented systems.  Construct  From a design theory perspective,  constructs  represent the entities of interest in a  theory.  These  can be abstract  terms which are theoretical  or  phenomena that are  physical or in our case virtual in nature (Gregor & Jones, 2007).  A literature review of systems  in  use  by  health  sciences  libraries  for information  retrieval,  analysis of  interviews,  and  observations  of  systems  found  in  health  organizations, led us to identify two categories of systems – resource providers and  resource facilitators based on their nature.  Resource providers are  online evidence platforms where  the content or full text is  hosted for clinicians  to retrieve. Resource facilitators  are  systems clinicians use  to  journey to full text or content  and  present  an opportunity  to improve  clinician’  research in practice.  Depending on the cloud services procured by an organization,  clinicians  can use  resource facilitators such as WSD (for pain points time, awareness and integration)  (Hanneke & O'Brien, 2016), Global Knowledgebase (for pain points resource scope)  (Wilson, 2016), Link Resolver (solution for pain point paywall and access) (Chisare et  al., 2017), Federated Access (for pain points paywall and access) (Hoy, 2019), CMS  (for integration and resource platforms) (De Silva & Burstein, 2014) and Document  Delivery  or  inter-library loan  (for pain points paywall, access)  (Brian, 2019).  The  configuration varies significantly from one organization to another. We scoped these  systems  to remove barriers to  information  retrieval.  A simplified version of the  context aware architecture in  Figure 2 illustrates the various constructs as part of  the resource facilitators group, and how they are unified using a single interface via  an API layer for integration.  <title>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION </title> Principles of form, function, and implementation  Principles of form and function in design theory relate to an abstract architecture or  “blueprint” that describes an information systems artefact. The context aware unified  architecture  provides  the necessary building  blocks  to develop an instantiation  solution,  however,  such  an architecture is complex  to implement  and requires  underlying principles for general application (Miah et al., 2018). Figure 3 builds on  the architecture in Figure  2 by presenting a  form and function of the solution and  illustrates the principles of implementation.  Based on DSR fundamentals the bottom section of the illustration in Figure 3 depicts   clinicians and healthcare  professionals retrieving  information for patient  care,  clinical research and fill knowledge gaps. The upper bar of the illustration depicts the  various online resources (e.g. medicine, guidelines, databases, books, journals, pointof-care, tools and other resources), available as evidence-based clinical information  for consumption by clinicians. Myriad online resources exist for clinicians to access,  or be aware of in what is already a time-poor industry (Miranda & Miah, 2019). Yet  knowledge from these resources depending on clinician groups (e.g. nurse, dentist,  general practitioner  etc.)  is essential to evidence-based practice. A  barrier  exists  between a clinician’s information retreival need and available evidence-based clinical  information, represented by the outer circle orbited by eight pain points. The central  circle offers implementation principles for health organizations to design a solution  that will both solve the problem and remove the barriers.  All artefacts in this research stream were designed and evaluated using the following  implementation  principles  and  the  final  instantiation  in combined form is  demonstrated. The design theory illustrates a degree of alignment and proximity  between the pain points and principles associated to solving specific pain points.  Principle 1: Built on library services foundation. Gardois et. al. (Gardois et al., 2011)  and Hall (Hall, 2008) showed that health sciences librarians retrieved information  better  as  they understood their  resources.  Kamada et. al.  (Kamada et al., 2021)  reported the close proximity of a physically embedded librarian  benefited  users.  Health sciences  librarians  play  key roles  in  configuring  systems  to  optimize the  solution for their users. An organization can do little to remove barriers on resource  provider platforms  because  these services are designed to serve a  wider audience.  Resource facilitators such as WSD,  Federate  Access and CMS  can be configured  towards knowledge formulation at a health organization level, making such a solution  feasible for health sciences librarians to optimize.  Taking  stock of all the systems available  at  a health sciences library in Project B  provided the building blocks for a feasible holistic solution (Miranda, 2019). Using  these building blocks rooted in library services resonated with library managers to  remove barriers while identifying  gaps in their services to prioritize future  procurement (Miranda & Miah, 2021). Project A used a custom web application as a  front-end  to  prototype  contextual  information  retrieval which  required significant  development effort  (Miranda & Miah, 2019). Using a CMS as front-end  for API  integration in Project C required significantly less development effort with the added  capability  for  libraries to  configure the font-end  and  better  support  clinicians’  information need.  Principle  2:  Serve diverse clinicians.  Chiu et. al. (Chiu et al., 2012) found that  different specialists need to retrieve different types of information and Ragon found  that tradition-based service models of health sciences libraries are insufficient to  meet the needs of biomedical researchers (Ragon,  2019).  An information seeking  study by Nwezeh et al. (Nwezeh et al., 2011) indicated that information delivery must  be  prioritized  for  clinicians  based  on their specialized skills information  need  priorities  which may differ by  clinician groups and individual clinicians.  With  hundreds of resources,  it is time consuming to use different platforms to research  clinical information. Minimizing research time irrespective of clinician’s education  and skill levels will alleviate delays and ensure that  diverse clinician groups  are  serviced.  Project A identified that an  organizational context is applied to services  as  it  aggregates and indexes  online evidence  containing  content across different  sectors  beyond medical. While this organizational context improved information relevance,  an added layer of group context made the results even more relevant  to  clinicians  area of specialization (Miranda & Miah, 2019). Project C built on these findings and  demonstrated that health sciences libraries could  create  different  group contexts.  This allowed diverse clinicians to borrow or apply their preferred  group context as  they retrieved information and adjust the borrowed context to suit their individual  needs (Miranda & Miah, 2021).  Principle  3:  Consider individual preferences.  Health  sciences  libraries  in  organizations  can be a one-stop-shop for clinician’s  information needs,  but  if  a  service does not offer a personalized experience, users avoid it and find alternative  means  to retrieve information. Saparova  et. al. (Saparova et al., 2014)  piloted a  federated search system that factored  in information needs of 51 clinicians;  key  feedback indicated  that personalization features improved human, technology, and  organization fit. Meeting  the  individual information needs of clinicians ensures  a  service delivers value; a lack of this capability was significant feedback in the search  system pilot.  Project A highlighted that that while group context significantly improved relevance  of results it was important to allow clinicians to remove the group context and  discover content at the organizational context level. Similarly, individuals may prefer  to tailor group context and organizational context (Miranda & Miah, 2019). Library  Managers interviewed  during  Project C  agreed with the results  but  added that the  ability to adjust preferences  at a granular level applied  to  clinicians  familiar with  library services and the range  of  options  without guidance could overwhelm most  clinicians (Miranda & Miah, 2021).  Principle 4: Accessible anywhere from any device. Licensed online evidence-based  clinical information is typically  behind a paywall  and requires authentication to  access,  which can challenge  clinicians who seek fast information  retrieval  in high  pressure situations.  Shanahan  (Shanahan, 2013)  reported a  lack of access to  computers, restrictions on websites, and  a lack of time to engage because to heavy  workloads limited evidence-based information retrieval. Knowledge delivery should  be platform independent and clinicians should be able to consume information at any  time and place (Kouame, 2014).  Procuring cloud-native services boosts an organization’s ability to let their clinicians  access content from anywhere on any device. Most resource providers of evidencebased  clinical information  allow access via online services  making procurement of  cloud-native resource facilitators a natural fit for a holistic solution (Miranda, 2019).  The time and effort required to release  improvements  is significantly higher when  cloud-native services were  not  maximized in  Project A.  Time  and effort on IT  infrastructure was eliminated in Project C which was optimized to use cloud-native  services.  Principle  5:  Grow resource awareness.  Health  organizations  may  subscribe to  hundreds of resources, but clinicians limit their use of resources to those with which  they are familiar,  potentially missing information  in other databases, journals, and  tools. Davies (Davies, 2011b) demonstrated UK doctor’ awareness and use of specific  evidence-based medicine resources was limited. With thousands of listed resources,  noise can be generated,  and knowledge of the relevant resources for individual  clinicians and respective groups should  be considered when designing systems for  information  retrieval  as  recommended  by  Davies  (Davies, 2011a)  and Olalekan  (Olalekan Moses, 2016).  During  Project  B  we  found that  an A-to-Z list to browser resources is generally  available to clinicians however these are generally exhaustive often used by clinicians  to find links to resources,  they  are familiar with compared  to grow resource  awareness (Miranda, 2019). In addition to creating group contexts in Project C based  on clinician specializations  the unified context aware architecture enables  health  sciences libraries to highlight new or existing resources  periodically  both at the  institutional context and group context levels (Miranda & Miah, 2021). This enables  knowledge acquisition or formulation across the solution holistically.  Principle  6:  Prioritize resources based on clinician  needs.  Various healthcare  professionals  have diverse information access needs and only  the most relevant  resources should be presented depending on the clinicians needs as recommended in  research conducted by Chiu et. al. (Chiu et al., 2012) and Davies (Davies, 2011a) who  found clinicians information needs vary. Mu et. al. (Mu et al., 2011) evaluated a novel  facet view interface based on a topic clustering algorithm and found this improved  the user experience compared to a list based interface.   Topic  clustering  inspired  the bento box in Project B which presented a range of  information feeds based on  group context (Miranda, 2019).  Project C introduced  context settings at  a  clinician level allowing individuals to adjust the information  feeds they would receive (Miranda & Miah, 2021). Such a knowledge acquisition or  formulation solution allows health sciences libraries to present a topic cluster relative  to  organizational context, another topic cluster relative to group context and any  number of topic clusters based on individual preferences to prioritize resources.  Artifact Mutability  Artifact mutability as part of a design theory’s anatomy refers to “the changes in state  of the artifact anticipated in the theory, that is, what degree of artifact change is  encompassed by the theory” (Gregor & Jones, 2007). The instantiations of models  and architectures in this research stream use specific technologies such as WSD,  CMS,  Global Knowledgebase, Document Delivery  as constructs,  and the form and  function of these technologies evolves over time.  Rather than design principles around specific technological  services which might  necessitate a computer science approach our research, we refer to the foundational  knowledge of user-oriented theory of information need.  Irrespective  of  how  technologies  might  evolve,  the design theory and underlying artefacts  allow health  sciences  librarians  to  adopt cloud-based services to  fit their organizational  and  clinician needs. By using a unified front-end user interface and integration of various  services via  API, health organizations can add, remove,  and change underlying  services of search, content management, and knowledgebase document delivery with  little impact to the user journey and experience.  Our  design theory advocates an iterative and incremental  approach to  implementation  allowing health organizations  to  adopt  resource facilitators at a  sustainable pace,  compared to a radical change in systems which is  also  feasible,  should a health sciences library prefer this approach.  Expository instantiation and testable propositions  An instantiation of a design theory which satisfies testable propositions demonstrate  theoretical and practical contribution of the artefact (Piirainen & Briggs, 2011).   We  iteratively developed  a  series of architecture designs,  developed  instantiations,  and demonstrated them to an academic panel with expertise in DSR and information  systems until a version satisfied all design principles.  Figure 2 illustrates how the various sub-systems are unified in the one interface using  a CMS. The instantiation in  Figure  4 include a  WSD search box,  Federated Access  sign in form, and resource links direct to providers including Global Knowledgebase  link outs to browse journals, databases, and eBooks. A link under the search field also  shows document delivery requests to use when full text is not available.  Upon sign-in clinicians are directed to a personalized section of the CMS where they  are recognized as a logged in user. Here a clinician is presented with resource options  based on a borrowed group template, or individual preferences as shown in Figure 4.  The prototype selects the general practitioner group context by default for clinicians  who have logged in for the first time,  however future implementations can be  designed with a wizard to walk users through context selection.   Figure 4 integrates the groups context evaluated in Project A but is integrated into a  CMS compared to a custom application to ensure feasible adoption by health sciences  libraries using cloud services. Pre-defined group templates are General Practitioner,  Nurse, Physiotherapist, Medical Researcher, and Psychologist; clinicians choose the  group to which they most identify.  This is followed by a My Quick Links block to  demonstrate the personalization  capabilities of the CMS, where a clinician can pick online evidence-based resources  they prefer to work on directly. Some examples include Cochrane Library, PubMed,  Lippincott Advisor, CINAHL Complete and Paediatric Care Online.  The layout of the page continues to take on a bento box approach (sensu Lown et. al.  (Lown et al., 2013)) to determine search result layouts. Here a clinician can choose to  view specific highlights from the full data set or limit by source type (e.g., journals,  books)  and even incorporate  publication-level titles in one single view;  Title  configuration is limited only by the clinician’s information needs. Other topic clusters  included  resources  from PubMed and Encyclopedia Britannica referred to as  Research Starters.  These  topic clusters were  based on group context with  scope to  apply user context.  Figure  5  demonstrates the context settings down the page for granular individual  preferences. These can be pre-populated depending on the underlying systems, such  as CMS taxonomy or facets from WSD services which we adopted.   Context settings were designed to appear on the same screen as context selection and  bento box results to compare the impact of setting changes to facilitate evaluations. It  is up to health  sciences libraries  to determine where these settings should  be  presented to users. Instantiation of the settings context is derived from filters from  the WSD service to expedite prototype development. Figure 5 shows filters such as  Databases, Source Type, Subject, Publication,  and Publisher,  which are generated  automatically based on the facet filters configured in the  selected  WSD  administration tool. Health sciences libraries can enable more or reduce the number  of filters based on what is appropriate for clinicians at their respective organizations.   When a user signs into the CMS the context layer queries the user preferences data  store to determine if any personalization was applied by the user. If data exists, the  selections are applied to the context settings so a user can recommence where they  left off configuring their personalization and adjust incrementally. Alternatively, the  context layer will retrieve data from the group template store to apply a selected or  preferred context.  Figure  6  demonstrates how searching is done in context with facets or filters preapplied to the results.  Users can enter keywords into the search box at the top of the page. Clicking the  search button redirects them to the results page.  Search results are presented in a  two-column layout with the left column about 30% of the total screen. The layout is  responsive and will change depending on the device for maximum usability.  Noteworthy observations in Figure 6 include a section above the results which shows  filters such as content providers or databases MEDLINE, BioOne Complete, Science  Direct and Format Academic Journals. Users can evaluate the relevance of results to  their context by removing filters, achieved by clicking the ‘remove’ icon next to a filter  name. Users can also add filters by expanding the filter types and selecting a filter on  the left side of the page.  <title>CONCLUSION </title> We conclude that barriers to clinical information retrieval at health organizations can  be  removed  by implementing resource facilitators using the  design theory in this  paper. Cloud services render a solution significantly feasible and accessible compared  to on-premises infrastructure.  Health sciences  libraries play  an important role in  designing  such a  holistic  solution  to address pain points  relative to their  organizations.  Artefacts  in this research stream were designed  and developed after conducting  a  review of literature  wherein  problems  experienced by researching clinicians  were  identified, rather than by contacting clinicians directly and soliciting problems.  Artefacts were evaluated as useful by an academic panel, clinicians as end users, a  confirmatory focus group, and three health sciences library managers in context to  their  health  organizations.  We communicated results  in our research stream in  scholarly publications and conferences,  ensuring  iterative  incremental evaluation  from specific instantiations to generalized knowledge by the type “Theory for Design  and Action”, i.e. theory of how to do things,  based on Gregor’s types of theories  (Gregor, 2006).  <title>REFERENCES </title>