<title>BUILDING AGILITY IN COVID-19 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESPONSE  IN SRI LANKA: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE </title> COVID-19 pandemic tested the capacity of information systems in countries on the  Abstract:   ability  to  rapidly  respond  to  requirements  which  were  not  anticipated.  This  article  analyzes the socio-technical determinants of agility in building the IS response to the  COVID-19 pandemic in Sri Lanka. We deploy qualitative research methods to explore  the case study of implementation of COVID-19 surveillance system in Sri Lanka. Three  key recommendations are developed for practice relating to  high-level multisectoral  governance, use of lightweight digital platforms and leveraging on existing capacities  and infrastructure.  COVID-19, agile software development, dhis2, surveillance system, health information  Keywords:  systems, Sri Lanka. <title>INTRODUCTION</title> Pandemics  are  characterized  by  high  levels  of  uncertainty  as  they  go  through  unexpected  and  dynamically  changing  situations  making  their  responses  difficult  to  predict.  What  is  certain,  however, is that timely quality data is important for health services and policy makers to respond  optimally.  How to best develop information systems (IS) to respond to health crisis as pandemics  is the topic of this article, based on an empirical analysis of the COVID-19 IS response in Sri Lanka.   When the H1N1 (swine flu) hit Japan in 2009, the software team applied agile iterative approaches  because of the limitations of traditional ‘waterfall’ approaches in addressing rapid changes (Murota,  Kato, & Okumura, 2010). Lai (Lai, 2018) emphasized the need to understand the determinants  driving agility,  and  identified four such conditions:  i) committed  leadership,  to  help overcome  organizational  barriers;  ii)  enabling  interdependence  to  allow  coordination  across  multiple  stakeholders; iii) context specific domain knowledge and expertise; and, iv) shared understanding  of common goals shaping response.   Uncertainty in pandemics provides unique resources for innovative and swift action. In the context  of COVID 19 response, Rigby, et. al. (Rigby, Elk, & Berez, 2020) argue that agile responses does  not typically come from a strategic plan, but comes as someone, somewhere identifies an urgent  need  for  action  and  finds  innovative  and  non-standard  solutions.    Agile  software  development  methods (Hamed & Abushama, 2013) is one such approach to build IS solutions based on rapid  prototyping  cycles  of  software  development,  release,  feedback  and  improvements.    However,  arguably  this  approach  is  limited  to  the  technical  aspects,  and  there  are  other  socio-technical  conditions to consider (Lai, 2018). Given this backdrop, the research question this paper addresses  is:  What are socio-technical determinants of agility in the context of IS response to COVID-19, and  how can these be best materialized in practice?  We analyze this question is the context of an ongoing successful IS response effort to the pandemic  in Sri Lanka. After this brief introduction, we conceptually discuss the notion of agility, followed  by  a  discussion  of  the  case  and  its  analysis.  Finally,  some  recommendations  for  practice  are  presented.  <title>CONCEPTUAL FRAMING: SOCIO-TECHNICAL PERSPECTIVE ON  AGILITY</title> Once WHO had declared the 2009 Swine flu a pandemic, Japan set up a task force to work on the  IS  response,  while  recognizing  the  ‘situation  caused  by  the  unforeseen  virus  was  beyond  the  architect's imagination’ (Murota et al., 2010). The management decided to develop a new system  (Day  1),  and  a  prototype  was  rapidly  developed  following  an  "agile"  approach  (Day  4),  and  following feedback, a next version was developed (Day 8) and on Day 13, the system was ready for  national roll-out. The rapid iterative cycles continued through the pandemic to accommodate to the  different changes, such as in surveillance policies and pandemic phase transitions.  For example,  while the initial focus was  on  identifying all patients and suspects, it subsequently changed to  locating cluster incidents with confirmed virus RNA. As the surveillance design was modified for  each phase, the IS had to also rapidly evolve in support using agile methods (Lee & Xia, 2010) as  traditional waterfall methods were grossly inadequate (Kapyaho & Kauppinen, 2015). Doz et al  describes strategic agility  as  the ability of the  organization  to  renew itself  and  remain flexible  without sacrificing efficiency(Doz & Kosonen, 2008). From an organizational perspective to ensure  strategic agility it require sensitivity to environment, resource fluidity and collective commitment.  While agile methods such as SCRUM emphasize individuals and interactions over processes and  tools (Agile Alliance, 2001), we argue an important lack is the inadequate attention given to the  materiality  of  the  platform  itself  used  for  the  agile  development.  We  see  “lightweight  IT  and  platforms” as an important determinant of agility.  (Øvrelid & Bygstad, 2016) contrasts lightweight and heavyweight IT with respect to the knowledge  regimes  they  underpin.  Lightweight  represents  “a  socio-technical  knowledge  regime”  driven  by  competent  users’  need  for  solutions,  enabled  by  the  consumerization  of  digital  technology,  and  realized through innovation processes. Usability, easiness in implementation and ability to quickly  follow up pilots are described as key characteristics of lightweight IT. In contrast, heavyweight IT  represents a knowledge regime driven by IT professionals, enabled by systematic specification and  proven digital technology,  and  realized  through  software engineering processes. The focus on  knowledge regimes highlights the socio-technical nature of IT.  We combine this notion with that of a platform, described as a “software-based product or service  that serves as a foundation on which outside parties can build complementary products or services”  (Tiwana, 2013). Tiwana also argues that platforms must be multisided, enabling the coming together  of two or more actors such as end users and app developers.  The manner in which a platform enables  the  coming  together  of  different  people,  technologies  and  processes  represents  a  platform  architecture (Baldwin & Woodard, 2008), which consists of a core with a set of stable components,  and complementary components that interact with the core. The wider software platform eco-system  is therefore composed by software modules, apps, interfaces between them, developers, users and a  variety of stakeholders.  Henfridsson and Bygstad (Henfridsson & Bygstad, 2013) suggest the unit  of analysis should not be the core of the platform but its boundary resources and the larger ecosystem.  We use this perspective for analysing the determinants of agility.  <title>METHODS</title> For this article, we used a case study approach because it helped us to look into the background and  complexities of the phenomena – agile growth of HIS in a pandemic situation in an LMIC context  like Sri Lanka. According to Darke et al, such a method is useful in younger and less developed  research areas, such as the phenomenon studied in this context (Darke, Shanks, & Broadbent, 1998).  Our methodology was an analytical inquiry exploring a contemporary phenomenon within a reallife framework – the Sri Lankan health system context, as described by Yin(Yin, 2014).  The basis of the development of the case study is an ongoing 10-year old engagement of the three  authors in the strengthening of the national health information systems in Sri Lanka, including in  the design and implementation of the COVID-19 IS response. The principal author is a graduate of  Masters and Doctoral program of Health Informatics and a key implementer of the IS response to  COVID pandemic in Ministry of Health (MoH) Sri Lanka. He conducted most of the field level data  collection for the study while engaging in implementation activities. Two other authors are senior  professors of the University of Oslo who have been closely engaged in establishment of Masters  Program in Biomedical Informatics in the University of Colombo, Sri Lanka and have engaged in  academic program of the Masters and Doctoral programs as well as providing mentorship to health  informatics implementations in Sri Lanka. For this paper, we focus firstly on the issue of building  national health informatics capacity, which provides the context for the analysis of the IS response  to COVID-19.  As argued by Yin we used multiple data collection techniques (Yin, 2014). We conducted 10 indepth  interviews  from  stakeholders at  national  and  district  level  engaged  with  the  information  management  on  COVID-19.  These  included  3  health  informatics  experts  from  MoH,  2  health  administrators  from  national  level,  2  experts  in  ICT  outside  the  MoH  who  contributed  to  the  surveillance system, 3 implementers and trainers of the system and 2 district level implementers of  the surveillance system. Since some of the writers were closely involved in the planning, creation,  and execution of the HIS in question, their lived experiences were recorded in the form of narratives  and analyzed. Memos were also compiled from observations made at stakeholder meetings during  the setup of the DHIS2-based surveillance scheme. Secondary data was also included in this analysis,  including publications released by public health organizations, records  delivered  at  stakeholder  meetings, and observations taken at informal meetings with stakeholders. During the study, the  authors' own historical accounts of the Masters program's establishment, the graduates' contributions  to the digital health ecosystem, and the development of health informatics in Sri Lanka were also  taken into account. However, since this was a retrospective analysis, the data collection for critical  stakeholder meetings had to depend on the authors' own recollections and meeting minutes.   Throughout the data analysis process, we were continuously sharing our thoughts and perspectives  on the information we had gathered. The case narrative was then collaboratively developed, and  thematic analysis methodology was used to define evolving themes, which were then critiqued  before being used in the development of this paper, as proposed by Braun et al (Braun & Clarke,  2014). We were able to eliminate any possible bias that could have clashed with our understanding  of the case by taking a collaborative approach to data analysis, considering the responsibilities we  perform within the phenomena we wish to examine.   <title>CASE STUDY</title> This process of building health informatics capacity in Sri Lanka started in 2009, and it was of  immense significance in building the COVID-19 response.  Sri Lanka provides both health and education free to its citizens, including the highly sought-after  medical  education.  This  policy  has  inspired  more  than  90%  of  the  medical  graduates  join  the  government medical services. Furthermore, the Ministry of Health (MoH) also provides full funding  for pursuing postgraduate specialization studies, including in health informatics, at the Postgraduate  Institute of Medicine of University of Colombo. In 2009, the Masters in Biomedical Informatics  (BMI) degree programme was established with financial and technical support from the University  of Oslo, Norway. This programme had a futuristic vision of producing medical specialists with a  background  of  biomedical  informatics,  so  as  to  develop  national  sustainable  capacity.  The  collaboration with Oslo and their world leading Health Information Systems Programme (HISP) has  helped the BMI students to be educated in modern informatics concepts and build expertise on the  DHIS2  platform  (see  dhis2.org).  The  unique  action  research  orientation  of  HISP,  was  also  an  underlying pedagogical principle in the BMI programme and students-built expertise on how to  apply DHIS2 to different problem contexts, such as for malaria and TB information management.  On completion of the programme, the BMI graduates reverted to the MoH where they assumed  duties as ‘Medical Officers in Health Informatics’ responsible for aspects of health policy, system  design,  development,  implementation  and  training.  These  officers,  with  rare  hybrid  skills  of  medicine and informatics, become crucial technical and administrative experts driving the national  HIS forward, and were fundamental in building the COVID-19 IS response, now described.  From January 2020,  when  there was a rising concern of  COVID-19  cases  in  some  East Asian  countries, Sri Lanka recognized the threat since it is a country of high tourist traffic and also hosts  many Chinese based infrastructure projects.  They acted rapidly, setting up a Presidential task force  headed by the commander in chief of the army, with key roles assigned to the Minister of Health,  Director General of Health Services (DGHS) and the police. The authority wielded by the task force  members ensured rapid decisions could be taken on both the health and citizen-based issues, such  as on quarantine and contact tracing. The task force reached out to representatives from other sectors  such as agriculture, education, immigration and social services, and sub-committees created on  implementation responsibilities.   An urgent priority of the task force was to establish a robust IS response to gather information on  possible  sources  of  infection  and  follow  up  of  suspect  cases.  Immediate  bottlenecks  was  the  unavailability of a generic outbreak management IS in the MoH and the long bureaucratic process  of procurement. The task force had the authority to subvert the typical bureaucratic processes and  decided to adopt a customisable platform as opposed to developing something from scratch. Given  the need to share data across departments, a cloud-based solution was mandated.    The MoH selected the DHIS2 platform for building this system, as it met identified criteria and  could quickly be configured for use, and because there was existing capacity and experiences with  the system. DHIS2 and its developers (HISP Sri Lanka) had the prior trust of the government. Initial  discussions  between  the  ministry  and  HISP  Sri  Lanka  started  in  3rd  week  of  January,  which  identified the initial priority of building a port of entry tracker module.  Using the existing DHIS2  “tracker” functionalities, this module was rapidly discussed and presented to  the  DGHS  on  27th  January just prior to the country reporting its first case of coronavirus. Permission was obtained for  national roll out.   Sri Lanka reported its second COVID-19 case on 11th of March, which was also accompanied with  large numbers of nationals returning from high burden countries such as Italy and South Korea,  leading to a steady rise in cases, going over 100 in 2 weeks. Confirmed cases were admitted to  designated hospitals and tracking of contacts was initiated. The country closed the ports of entry in  the third week of March, and the IS response shifted from port of entry to tracking of confirmed and  suspect  cases  from  community clinics,  quarantine  centres  and  testing laboratories.  DHIS2  is  a  generic platform and a new module for tracking persons during their quarantine period was rapidly  developed.  The country reported its first COVID-19 death on 28th of March, and the current total is at  11 cases,  including 7 cases in the first 11 days. This surge and increase in number of patients requiring the  ICU  care  were  seen  as  red  flags,  requiring  optimal  management  of  ICU  beds.    However,  the  country's critical care IS had not been operational in the last few years, and so the task force required  an ICU bed management component to be included to detect availability and proximity of ICU beds.  Following this request, a module in DHIS2 to track availability of ICU beds was developed during  a hackaton with participants from local software development and volunteer community and with  input from healthcare professionals.   Typical Ministry’s capacity building initiatives were based on face-to-face settings which was now  not possible.  After the declaration of the national curfew on 21st of March, training programmes  were mobilized through the Zoom videoconferencing platform, and training content was developed  with high graphical content rather than having lengthy training material. This shift in training media  and content enabled the Ministry to rapidly scale the system nationally. The training sessions were  typically targeted for each district with participation of around 20 users per online training session.  While  the  overall  IS  response  reflected  well  the  process  of  local  innovations,  there  were  also  innovations  developed  through  collaboration  with  the  Oslo  global  DHIS2  team.  Some  new  requirements could not be addressed locally and required work on the core software, which could  be done with the global team. For example, while developing the port of entry module, the ministry  required the flexibility to change the registering organization unit of a passenger, a functionality not  available in the core DHIS2. The global team then helped modify the codebase and to also help  visualize transmission relationship and contact mapping as a graphical network. This example shows  the power of global-local collaboration and sharing of expertise. Slowly, as the system started to  acquire more generic features, the global team worked towards creating a generic app which is now  in use in 20+ countries, including Norway. Additionally, local software development capacity was  organized  through  multisector  collaboration  between  MoH,  government  ICT  agency  and  the  volunteer software developer. A hackathon was organized in the second week of March to develop  additional modules and functionalities, such as the ICU bed tracking module mentioned above. The  ICT Agency in addition provided infrastructure support for hosting of the solution in the government  cloud,  internet  facilities  to  hospitals  and  health  facilities  as  well  as  provision  of  workspace  environments for collaborations such as “Slack”. Thus, there were multisector engagements across  domains at local and international level.  We  summarize  the  above  discussion  through  a  table  which  summarizes  the  different  functionalities/modules  developed  and implemented  using  the  DHIS2  platform.  The  speed  and  variety of development is illustrating the agility involved.  <title>5. DISCUSSION </title> Our case analysis identifies three key determinants of agility which we first present through the  model below and then discuss. In the section that follows, we present recommendations for practice  based on the model (Figure1).  Our model emphasizes that agility is not only about software development methods, but involves a  combination of social, political and technical conditions, including: i) high-level and multi-sectoral  governance mechanisms; ii) leveraging on historically existing capacity and infrastructure; iii) use  of established lightweight digital platform.   : Even before the pandemic had made its  High-level and multi-sectoral governance mechanisms entry in the country, a high-level task force was constituted under the leadership of the President’s  office and comprising of senior decision makers from different sectors.  This governance structure  enabled the taking of agile decisions, which were cross-departmental and broke down historically  existing bureaucratic structures, such as related to the software procurement process.  Similarly,  questions of quarantine and lockdowns were decided by representatives from health, immigration  and police. The structure enabled multi-sectorial rapid decision-making, with well thought through  processes to ensure implementation compliance.    : Three aspects of history were  Leveraging on historically existing capacity and infrastructure crucial in building agility. One, concerned the BMI programme which had been in operation since  2009  and  had  contributed  to  the  education  of  many  doctors  who  occupied  important  health  informatics positions in the Ministry. Two, was the fact that the DHIS2 was well established through  use by nearly 20 health departments.  Three, was the HISP Sri Lanka team, comprised of graduates  from the BMI programme with high levels of DHIS2 expertise and strong collaborative links with  the global DHIS2 team to bring about changes in the core when needed.   : The DHIS2 was a well-established digital  Leveraging on lightweight digital platform – DHIS2 platform within the Ministry, and over the years had cultivated an enabling infrastructure around it,  such as for server hosting.  The DHIS2, by design, is a lightweight platform that is flexible and  adaptable to different use contexts, and new functionalities can be added relatively easily, without  the need for core programming support. While as an web based independent application DHIS2 was  easy to implement within the existing infrastructure, integration with other systems such as labs and  custom  was  also  easily  achieved. The  DHIS2  comes  with  core  modules,  for  example  for  data  analysis, dash boards, spatial analysis etc, which were easily adapted to the specific requirements  for COVID-19 surveillance. For features, not currently available in the core, for example related to  conducting network analysis, could be developed by enrolling national and global expertise, for  example through hackathons.   In summary, agility was ensured through: i) the high-level governance mechanism, which enabled  rapid  decision  making  and  implementation;  ii)  the  lightweight  platform  allowed  for  rapid  incorporation of new functionalities as the information demands of the pandemic evolved; and, iii)  the existing DHIS2 related capacity which allowed system development and implementation to take  place on the fly, without needing to build from scratch..  Many existing problems of HIS in LMICs relate to the absence of effective governance mechanisms  to mitigate the technical and institutional fragmentation of systems (Sahay, Sundararaman, & Braa,  2017).  This  leads  to  challenges  in  establishing  and  implementing  standards,  promoting  fragmentation and the absence of an architecture approach.  Pandemic responses by design require  cross-sectoral collaboration across ministries of health, finance, home and others, which has been  historically difficult to achieve in practice. Our case illustrates, a high-level task force in conditions  of crisis can help to ensure such collaboration. In different countries, the models of building such a  structure would be different, for example housed in the President’s office (as in this case), or in other  departments such as home or health, depending on the political power they wield and their capacity  to engage in multi-sectorial collaborative action.   While there is an implicit acknowledgement of the value of free and open source digital platforms,  there is an absence of explicit policy on its implementation. Given the need for sharing data across  systems,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  using  free  software  which  do  not  come  with  licensing  encumbrances and have open APIs which are publicly published.  For example, in the case presented,  the  use  of  free  software  allowed  easy  sharing  of  data  between  the  immigration  and  health  departments, which would have been impossible in its absence.  The lightweight aspect of platforms  ensures that they can be developed and evolved by super users without core software programming  expertise.  New digital platforms require the development of novel multi-faceted capacities, which take time  and effort to build.  These capacities cannot be developed through individual training programmes,  as is often the case in development projects, but need to be anchored in institutions. The BMI  programme at the University of Colombo provided that anchoring and their symbiotic relationship  with the Ministry ensured hybrid expertise was developed and rooted in the country. This solid  foundation allowed for new capacities to be quickly developed around the new application, and  using innovations in training media and content, scale could be  achieved. An important policy  implication is to develop a strong foundation of capacity anchored in institutions with symbiotic  relationships with the Ministry.  <title>CONCLUSION</title> Pandemics by definition are dynamic and evolving rapidly requiring also the IS response to be  flexible and evolve in an agile manner. Understanding how such agility can be enabled is thus both  a  crucial  theoretical  and  practical  challenge.  Our  paper  has  sought  to  contribute  to  building  understanding on how to build agility, emphasizing it is not a technical but fundamentally a sociotechnical collaborative effort. <title>REFERENCES</title>