January 12, 2022 I. Physikalisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, Zülpicher Straße 77, 50937, Köln, Germany Center of Planetary Systems Habitability, The University of Texas at Austin, USA Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA Context. Observations of the emission of the carbon cycle species (C, C properties in the interstellar medium but are signiﬁcantly sensitive to the cosmic-ray ionization rate. The carbon-cycle chemistry is known to be quite sensitive to the cosmic-ray ionization rate, ζ, controlled by the ﬂux of low-energy cosmic rays which get attenuated through molecular clouds. However, astrochemical models commonly assume a constant cosmic-ray ionization rate in the clouds. Aims. We investigate the eﬀect of cosmic-ray attenuation on the emission of carbon cycle species from molecular clouds, in particular the [CII] 158 µm, [CI] 609µm and CO (J = 1 - 0) 115.27 GHz lines. Metho ds. We use a post-processed chemical model of diﬀuse and dense simulated molecular clouds and quantify the variation in both column densities and velocity integrated line emission of the carbon cycle with diﬀerent cosmic-ray ionization rate models. Results. We ﬁnd that the abundances and column densities of carbon cycle species is signiﬁcantly impacted by the chosen cosmic-ray ionization rate model: no single constant ionization rate can reproduce the abundances modelled with an attenuated cosmic-ray model. Further, we show that constant ionization rate models fail to simultaneously reproduce the integrated emission of the lines we consider, and their deviations from a physically derived cosmic-ray attenuation model is too complex to be simply corrected. We demonstrate that the two clouds we model exhibit a similar average A– nrelationship, resulting in an average relation between the cosmic-ray ionization rate and density ζ(n). Conclusions. We conclude by providing a number of implementation recommendations for CRs in astrochemical models, but emphasize the necessity for column-dependent cosmic-ray ionization rate prescriptions. Key words. Astrochemistry - ISM: abundances - ISM: clouds - (ISM:) cosmic rays - ISM: molecules Molecular clouds are ﬂooded by energetic, charged particles, called cosmic rays (CRs), accelerated in shocked environments throughout the galaxy (Grenier et al. 2015; Padovani et al. 2020). In dense molecular gas, well-shielded from ultraviolet radiation, CRs are the dominant source of ionization. In particular, the ionization is dominated by protons with energies between 1 MeV – 1 GeV and secondary electrons produced by primary protons (Dalgarno 2006). Through the CR ionization of Hand formation of H, subsequent proton-transfer reactions lead to a diverse zoo of molecular chemistry e.g., HCO, CO, HO and NH, as well as initiating the deuteration process (see e.g. Tielens 2005; Dalgarno 2006; Bayet et al. 2011; Caselli & Ceccarelli 2012; Indriolo & McCall 2013; Bialy & Sternberg 2015; Bisbas et al. 2015; Gaches et al. 2019a). CR ionization also acts as a source of heating in dense gas. Thus, the CR ionization rate (CRIR), denoted ζ (units Hionizations per sec), is one of the most fundamental parameters in astrochemical modeling. Despite the importance of the CRIR, it is often treated simply with the assumption of a single constant rate. However, low-energy CRs rapidly lose energy as they propagate through molecular gas through Coulomb interactions, ionizations, and pion production (Schlickeiser 2002; Padovani et al. 2009). There have been several parameterizations of the attenuation of the CRIR as a function of the hydrogen-nuclei column density, hereafter denoted ζ(N) (e.g. Padovani et al. 2009; Morlino & Gabici 2015; Schlickeiser et al. 2016; Padovani et al. 2018; Phan et al. 2018; Ivlev et al. 2018; Silsbee & Ivlev 2019). Several astrochemical models have included such prescriptions in one-dimensional astrochemical models (e.g. Rimmer et al. 2012; Grassi et al. 2019; Owen et al. 2021; Redaelli et al. 2021). While including CR transport (at least high-energy CR transport) has started to become more standard in galactic-scale simulations, to the authors knowledge the inclusion of CR energy losses (and thus a CRIR gradient) has yet to be included in threedimensional astrochemical models. Carbon can be found in three major phases in the ISM; the ionized (C), the atomic (C) and the molecular in the form of CO. Their spectral line emission is of signiﬁcant importance in controlling the gas temperature and the overall thermal balance in the ISM (Hollenbach & Tielens 1999). They can be also used to determine the ISM environmental parameters and identify the conditions that may lead to star-formation. For example, the emission ofCO lines is connected with the presence of molecular gas. The particular J = 1 − 0 transition at 115.27 GHz and with an energy separation between the two levels of hν/k∼ 5.5 K, is commonly used to infer to the column density of Hvia the so-called ‘X−factor’ (see Bolatto et al. 2013, for a review). Combining all the diﬀerent CO transitions together into a Spectral Line Energy Distribution (SLED) diagram can reveal much of the ISM conditions that exist in the observed objects. The two emission lines of atomic carbon P→Pat 609 µm (hereafter referred to simply as [CI]) andP→Pat 370 µm have been also proposed to probe the H-rich gas (Papadopoulos et al. 2004; Oﬀner et al. 2014; Gaches et al. 2019b; Bisbas et al. 2021) in both local (e.g. Lo et al. 2014) and extragalactic systems (e.g. Zhang et al. 2014; Bothwell et al. 2017). Finally, the particular line of Cat 158 µm (hereafter referred to as [CII]) is frequently connected to the presence of warm and ionized gas due to the proximity of its ionization potential (11.2 eV) to that of hydrogen (13.6 eV), although a large fraction of it may originate from molecular gas (Accurso et al. 2017; Franeck et al. 2018). Recent studies (Meijerink et al. 2011; Bialy & Sternberg 2015; Gaches et al. 2019a; Bisbas et al. 2015, 2017b, 2021) have shown that cosmic rays play an immense role in determining the transitions between each carbon cycle phase. Through reactions of CO with He, the latter of which is a direct consequence of the presence of elevated cosmic-ray energy densities in UV-shielded regions, the abundances of both Cand C are increased. On the other hand, the transition between atomic and molecular gas remains little affected by ordinary boosts of CRIR. This eﬀect can create extended molecular regions (with hni . 10cm) rich in C and even in Cif the cosmic-ray ionization rate is & 500 times the average one of Milky Way. Thus modelling as accurately as possible the propagation and the attenuation of cosmic rays as a function of column density, is crucial when studying photodissociation and cosmic-ray dominated regions. In this study, we include a prescription for ζ(N ) in a post-processed three-dimensional astrochemical model of a molecular cloud. In particular, we investigate the impact of the resulting complex three-dimensional CRIR gradients on the abundances and emission from the carbon cycle species, C, C, CO. In §2, we describe the astrochemical CR dominated region (CRDR) model and our prescription for ζ(N ). In §3, we discuss the results of our model analysis. We conclude in §4. We use the density and velocity distributions of the ‘dense’ and ‘diﬀuse’ cloud models presented in Bisbas et al. (2021), which are sub-regions taken from the Wu et al. (2017) MHD simulations. Each sub-region is a cube of side length L = 13.88 pc, resolved with 112uniform cells. The ‘dense’ cloud has a total mass, M= 5.9 × 10M, a mean H-nucleus number density hni ≡ M/(Lµm) ∼ 640 cm, where mis the mass of the hydrogen nucleus, and µ = 1.4 is the mean particle mass. The mean (observed) H-nucleus Article number, page 2 of 14 column density is hNi = hniL = 2.7 × 10cm. The ‘diﬀuse’ cloud has a total mass, M= 1.9 ×10M, mean H-nucleus number density hni = 210 cmand a mean column density, hNi = 9.0 × 10cm. We focus our primary results on the ‘dense’ cloud, although we note similarities with the ‘diﬀuse’ model. We compute the atomic and molecular abundances, x(i) = n(i)/n, for species i, level populations and gas temperature using the publicly available astrochemical code3d-pdr (Bisbas et al. 2012). We adopt a subset of the UMIST 2012 chemical network (McElroy et al. 2013), which consists of 33 species and 330 reactions, and standard ISM abundances at solar metallicity (n/n= 0.1, n/n=10, n/n=3 × 10; Cardelli et al. 1996; Cartledge et al. 2004; Röllig et al. 2007). We use an external isotropic FUV intensity of G= 10 (normalized according to Habing 1968), a metallicity of Z = 1 Zand a microturbulent dispersion velocity of v= 2 km sto be consistent with Bisbas et al. (2021). Our use of these clouds enables us to investigate the impact of cosmic-ray attenuation of more realistic self-generated clouds, even though the simulations were evolved with diﬀerent physical parameters (e.g. variable FUV radiation and no CR heating). However, since our goal is to investigate the impact of CR attenuation, the primary results of this work will not be greatly changed by a diﬀerent external FUV ﬂux. Furthermore, to construct the emission maps of cooling lines we solve the equation of radiative transfer using the approach presented in Bisbas et al. (2017a), with updates presented in Bisbas et al. (2021) to account for dust emission/absorption. Cosmic-ray attenuation is included using the prescription for the CRIR versus hydrogen column density, ζ(N), from Padovani et al. (2018), such that where the coeﬃcients, c, are taken from Table F.1 of Padovani et al. (2018), shown also in Table 1, and N is the total hydrogen column density ‘seen’ by the cosmic ray. We use the H model, which reproduces the AMS-02 highenergy CR spectrum (Aguilar et al. 2014, 2015) and adjusts the low energy spectrum, below E < 1 GeV, to reproduce the CRIR inferred in diﬀuse gas (e.g. Indriolo & McCall 2012; Indriolo et al. 2015; Neufeld & Wolﬁre 2017). For the hydrogen column density, we utilize the eﬀective (local) hydrogen column density (Glover et al. 2010) computed as part of the radiation transfer calculations in 3d-pdr, where we sum over the N= 12 HEALPix rays of the ` = 0 level onto which the hydrogen number density is projected and summed along (see Bisbas et al. 2012 for details). Hereafter, we refer to species abundances and densities through parentheses, and to elemental abundances through subscripts. https://uclchem.github.io/3dpdr/ For implementation into Fortran codes, it is heavily advised to use 16 digit precision reals, to avoid numerical inaccuracy after the logarithm is exponentiated. Table 1: The ccoeﬃcients for Equations 1 and 6. The coeﬃcients, c, are taken from Table F.1 from Padovani et al. (2018). While the true column density, N, should take into account the propagation along potentially twisted magnetic ﬁeld lines, our assumption allows for a ﬁrst examination of the impact of CR attenuation in three-dimensions and represents a case where the magnetic ﬁeld lines are not signiﬁcantly tangled (valid for n≤ 10cm, see Padovani et al. 2013). We compare our CR-attenuated CRDR model with four constant-CR models, ζ= (1, 2, 5, 10)×10s. The particular ζ= ζ≡ 2 × 10srate corresponds to the total mass-weighted CRIR in the domain, calculated using the ζ(N ) model: ζ=n(x, y, z)ζ(x, y, z)dVRn(x, y, z)dV≈ 2 × 10s where the integral is performed over the volume, V , of the simulation domain. In this work, we assume that the impinging CR ﬂux is isotropic and free-stream into the cloud. Deviations from these assumptions would incur a locally anisotropic cosmicray ﬂux. Cosmic-ray magneto-hydrodynamic simulations of molecular clouds are needed to elucidate the signiﬁcance of this anisotropy or post-processing with more sophisticated treatments of cosmic-ray transport (see e.g. Fitz Axen et al. 2021 for this treatment with point sources). Figure 1 shows the gas column densities and the line-ofsight mass-weighted CRIR, ζ(x, y) =n(x, y, z)ζ(x, y, z)dzRn(x, y, z)dz for both ‘dense’ and ‘diﬀuse’ clouds. We see that there is a strong correlation of the gas column density with the massweighted CRIR along the line-of-sight. There is an order of magnitude variation of the CRIR throughout the cloud due to the attenuation. Figure 2 shows the column density integrated along the Z axisfor the carbon cycle species we consider for the two diﬀerent clouds. Figure 3 summarizes the velocity integrated line emission of [CII] 158µm, Throughout this paper, projection plots integrate along the Z axis unless otherwise stated. Fig. 1: Total gas column density (left) and line-of-sight mass-weighted CRIR (Eq. 4) (right) for the ‘dense’ (top) and ‘diﬀuse’ (bottom) cloud models. Fig. 2: Summary of the carbon-cycle column densities for the ‘dense’ (top) and ‘diﬀuse’ (bottom) cloud using the ζ(N ) model. [CI] 609µm and CO (J = 1 − 0) for both clouds. We will discuss the aforementioned results in more detail below. Figure 4 shows the 2D-PDF distribution, hereafter referred to as a ‘phase space’, of CRIR and density for the ‘dense’ and ‘diﬀuse’ clouds. The distribution shows that low-density regions encounter a CRIR an order of magnitude greater than at the highest densities. The overall trends can be explained by a self-gravitating cloud with turbulence induced porosity, such that lower density gas is more likely to be closer to the edge of the domain and Fig. 3: Summary of the carbon-cycle line-of-sight integrated ﬂuxes for the ‘dense’ (top) and ‘diﬀuse’ (bottom) cloud using the ζ(N ) model. Fig. 4: The local cosmic-ray ionization rate – density 2DPDF for the ‘dense’ and ‘diﬀuse’ clouds. The red line is a parameterization utilizing an A–nrelation (see Eq 5) and the black dashed line is the analytic equation by Eq. 6.. dense gas is typically found in more embedded regions in the cloud. The two clouds show remarkable similarities in the distribution functions for the same density range. Article number, page 4 of 14 Fig. 5: . The A– n2D-PDF for the ‘dense’ and ‘diffuse’ clouds. The red-line is the A–nrelation (see Eq 5). Here, we discuss the average ζ – nrelation in both clouds, and the implications for a more general relation. Numerous previous theoretical investigations have found an average trend between the eﬀective (local) Aand the total Hnucleus number density, n, (see e.g. Glover et al. 2010; Van Loo et al. 2013; Safranek-Shrader et al. 2017; Seifried et al. 2017; Bisbas et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021). Figure 5 shows the A− ndistribution for the two simulations along with a best ﬁt function from Bisbas et al. (2019), Bisbas et al. (in prep): where A= 0.05, a = 1.6, and γ = 0.12, and where for typical dust properties Aand Nare related through N/A= 1.6 × 10cm≡ f (Bohlin et al. 1978; Weingartner & Draine 2001; Röllig et al. 2007; Rachford et al. 2009). We ﬁnd that the best ﬁt function reasonably reproduces the average trends in our distribution functions. A further discussion of the A– nrelation is deferred to Bisbas et al. (2019) (in particular their Appendix B and Figure B.1) and Bisbas et al. (in prep). Combining Eqs. (1) and (5) we get an analytic equation for the mean relationship of the attenuated CRIR and the density in the gas. We get: where A = log(fA) = 19.90, B = a loge = 0.69, γ = 0.12 (Eq. 5), and the ccoeﬃcients are the same as in Eq. (1) and are given in Table 1. This ζ − nrelation is shown in Figure 4 (red-dashed curve). This simple prescription is able to reproduce the average behavior of the 2D distribution for both clouds. The universality of the ζ − n relation is rooted at the universality of the A− nrelation, which is found to be remarkably robust across seven orders of magnitude in density, and is seen in various simulation codes (the A−nrelation does, however, depend on metallicity; see Hu et al. 2021). We note that this trend is likely to hold only in the limit that the CR ﬂux is relatively isotropic, that the transport is dominated by energy-losses and not turbulent diﬀusion (and thus only dependent on the column density) and that there are no embedded sources of CRs. Due to the similarity of the ζ – nphase space between the two clouds and of their A– nphase spaces, we expect the qualitative impact of CR attenuation to be similar. Therefore, in the rest of this paper, we focus only on the ‘dense’ cloud simulation. We will ﬁrst discuss the impact of CR attenuation on the distribution of C, C and CO. Figure 6 shows the column densities of C, C and CO for the ζ(N) model and the relative diﬀerences in the column densities, deﬁned by for a given species, i, with constant CRIR, ζrelative to the ζ(N) model. We ﬁnd that the ζ= 5 × 10smodel signiﬁcantly overproduces Cand C and under-produces CO, while the ζ= 10smodel under-produces C and C but overproduces CO. The model with ζ= 2 × 10shas the minimal error. The behavior of CO is interesting; the ζ= 5 × 10smodel over produces CO in diﬀuse regions while under-producing CO in a thin zone surrounding the dense gas structures. This trend is ﬂipped for the ζ= 2 × 10and 5 × 10smodels. At high densities, the CO distributions are eﬀectively identical. Figures 7-9 show the x(C) − n, x(C) − n, x(CO) − n phase spaces, for our various simulations with the binaverages as red lines. The last panel on the bottom right of each ﬁgure shows the linear-relative error in the average abundance proﬁles for a speciﬁc constant CRIR model compared to the ζ(N ) model. Looking at Figures 7 – 9, we can identify several general trends. First, for densities n. 100 cm, the abundance of Cis insensitive to the ζ. This is because gas at these densities is preferentially located near the cloud boundary (following the Eq. 5, this gas has A≤ 0.8, on average) where carbon photo-ionization is eﬃcient and dominates the production of C. In this regime, photoionization keeps the carbon predominantly in ionized form, with x(C) ' A≈ 10, where Ais the elemental carbon abundance. Then, as we move to higher densities, we sample regions at higher A, at which point dust absorption becomes important signiﬁcantly reducing the eﬃciency of carbon photo-ionization. At n 100 cm, CR-driven reactions dominate over photo-ionization and the Cabundance then depends on ζ. In this regime, as the CRIR increases, the abundances of both C and Cincrease, at the expense of CO. This is because CRs (1) ionize He resulting in the formation of He, and (2) excite Hmolecules generating an FUV radiation inside the cloud interior (Sternberg et al. 1987; Gredel et al. 1989; Heays et al. 2014; Bialy 2020). Both the Heions and the FUV cosmic-ray produced FUV The ionization potential of C is E = 11.3 eV. Thus, even in regions where the hydrogen is predominantly neutral (i.e., in the bulk of the ISM), carbon may be readily photo-ionized by photons with energies in the range E = (11.3 − 13.6) eV. radiation result in the destruction of CO molecules and the formation of C and C. Similarly, for very high CRIRs, the induced FUV radiation can become an important source of Cthrough the photo-ionization of C. Thus, the abundances of C and Cgenerally increase with ζ. For a thorough discussion of these chemical reactions, see §2.3 in Bialy & Sternberg 2015, see also their §5 for analytic scaling relations (in particular, their Eq. 45). Indeed, looking at Figs. 7 – 8, we see that within this high-density regime, the C and Cabundances are always higher for the two models with high CRIRs (ζ= (5, 10) × 10s), compared to the ζ(N) model (at these densities the ζ(N ) model gives a CRIR that is typically below 5 × 10s; see Fig. 4). Looking at the bottom-right panels of Figs. 7 – 8, we see that as the density increases, the relative abundances of C and C(in each of the ζmodels, relative to the ζ(N ) model) increases with increasing ζ. At suﬃciently high densities, even the models with ζ= 2 × 10s and ζ= 10sexhibit a higher C and Cabundances, compared to the ζ(N) model. This is because while the CRIR remains constant in the ζmodels, it decreases with nin the ζ(N) model, as seen in Fig. 4 (see also Eq. 6). Speciﬁcally, at the points, n≈ 5 × 10and 10cm, the CRIR in the ζ(N) model falls below the values of the two constant CRIR models, ζ= 2 × 10sand ζ= 10 s, respectively. These are the points where there is a transition from underproduction to over-production of C and Cin the ζ= (1, 2) × 10smodels (compared to the ζ(N ) model), i.e., the curves in the bottom-right panels cross zero. Looking at Fig. 9, we see that while the region where the CO abundance is sensitive to ζ is limited to low and intermediate densities, n. 10cm, whereas for n≈ 10 cmCO becomes essentially independent of ζ. This is because at even though CRs drive the destruction processes of CO, at these high densities, the CO formation rate strongly exceeds the destruction rate (the CO formation-todestruction rate ratio increases with n/ζ). Thus, the carbon becomes predominantly in the form of CO, and the CO abundance saturates at the elemental carbon abundance, We now investigate the impact of CR attenuation on the velocity integrated line emissions of [Cii] 158µm, [Ci]P→ Pat 609µm and theCO J = 1 − 0 (hereafter ‘CO (10)’) rotational transition at 115.27 GHz. Figure 10 shows the [Ci] 609µm and CO (1-0) integrated emission and the relative errors of these with diﬀerent constant CRIRs compared to the ζ(N ) model. We ﬁnd that the 5 × 10smodel is overly bright in [Cii] 158µm and [Ci] 609µm while 10sis too dim. For [Ci] 609µm there is a low-density pocket in which these trends are ﬂipped. For CO (1-0), the ζ= 5 × 10s model is too dim in diﬀuse gas regions, while being overbright in dense gas (compared to the ζ(N) model). This trend is ﬂipped in the ζ= 10smodel. Figure 11 shows probability density functions (PDFs) of the distribution of the emission of [Cii] 158µm, [Ci] 609µm and CO (1-0). For [Ci] 609µm, the distribution at the lowend is nearly identical, while there are signiﬁcant deviations for bright regions. The peak brightness changes dras- Fig. 6: First column: Column densities of ionized carbon (top), neutral carbon (middle) and carbon monoxide (bottom) for our non-constant ζ(N) model. Second to Fourth columns: The relative diﬀerence (see Eqn. 7) in column density for a constant CRIR with respect to the ζ(N ) model for each of the aforementioned species. tically with diﬀerent constant ionization rates, highlighting the issues with modeling C chemistry and emission with a constant ionization rate. However, the distributions of the [Ci] 609µm emission for the ζ(N ) and ζ= 2 × 10models are nearly identical. This trend is matched by the CO emission, where there is a broad distribution of high emission which is very sensitive to the constant CRIR chosen. For the [Cii] 158µm emission, none of the constant CRIR models well represents the distribution in the ζ(N ) model, although the mass-weighted ζ= 2×10sbest matches both the peak and the distribution. The physical reason behind the changing [Ci] 609µm emission peaks lies in the contrast between the gas temperature and the excitation temperature. The decrease in the emission peak is due to the dense-gas (n> 10cm) temperature dropping below hν/k' 23.1 K, the temperature associated with the energy of the [Ci] forbidden-line emission at 609µm (see Appendix A). Thus, choosing a CRIR to match the diﬀuse gas will produce higher temperatures in the dense gas. t is worth reminding that the temperatures calculated here are not self-consistent with the Hu et al. (2021) results. Their CRIR is scaled linearly with the local star-formation rate, without attenuation included. Our current analysis has focused on a single projection, along the Z-axis, of the cloud. Here, we evaluate the im- Article number, page 6 of 14 pact of diﬀerent lines of sight. In Figure 12, we show the [CI] 609µm integrated ﬂux distribution for diﬀerent projections Figure 12 shows that the distributions are relatively similar, although there is more dim emission in the other projections. The X- and Y-projections are nearly identical. Figure 13 shows the ratio of the total integrated ﬂux for each ζmodel with respect to the ζ(N ) model for the three emission lines considered here. The blue line shows the Zprojection emission, while the red shade regions shows the overall spread with the line of sight. For the optically-thin emission, the trend of the total ﬂux ratio for diﬀerent ζ values is the same. For CO, there is greater spread, although the qualitative trends are the same with diﬀerent lines of sight. The higher spread is expected due to the optical thickness of the line. Finally, we show in Figure 14 the CO Spectral Line Energy Distribution (SLED) for the diﬀerent CRIR models. We ﬁnd that for low-J transitions, all the ζmodels well reproduce the line ratios. However, towards higher-J transitions, the diﬀerences become more discrepant, due to the attenuation of the CRs resulting in diﬀerent temperature distributions in dense gas. The ζ= 10and 2 × 10 smodels give the best agreement with the ζ(N) model, while the higher ζmodels produce too much high J-CO excitation. This is because these lower CRIR models have Fig. 7: Cabundance, x(C) versus hydrogen nuclei density, n The red lines denote the binned averaged abundance proﬁles in log-log space. The dashed-dotted lines shows the ζ(N) abundance proﬁle for comparison. The bottom right panel shows the relative error of the average abundance proﬁles. a mass-weighted mean temperature that is quite similar to the one seen in the ζ(N ) model (see Appendix A). We have presented an analysis of a post-processed photodissociation region model of a dense molecular cloud in which we have included a prescription of the CRIR as a function of the local hydrogen column density, ζ(N ). We ﬁnd the following: 1. The column density projection maps of the carbon cycle species, C, C and CO, are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the inclusion of cosmic-ray attenuation versus utilizing a constant ionization rate. The relative error in the column densities computed using a constant ionization rate versus an attenuated model can be greater than unity (Figure 6). However, for deeply embedded regions, the impact on the CO column density is marginal. 2. The choice of CR model has a profound impact on the resulting volumetric abundances of the carbon cycle species, n(Figs. 7 – 9). This eﬀect is particularly strong for Cand C, with variations greater than an order of magnitude for number densities, n> 10cm. 3. We demonstrate that the overall velocity integrated emission of many species is changed by imposing a column density dependent CRIR model, not only due to . The cosmic-ray model is annotated in each panel. changes in the abundances, but also in the temperatures of the dense gas (n> 10cm) because of the volumetric nature of cosmic ray heating. In particular, we ﬁnd that, irrespective of the chosen line of sight, high constant ionization rates over-produce [CII] and [CI] emission and under-produce CO (J = 1-0) emission, while the inverse is true for low constant ionization rate models. No constant ionization rate model is able to reproduce all lines simultaneously, although the rate, ζ= 2 × 10shas the smallest relative errors for all projections. 4. For CO, the spectral line energy distribution is also impacted by the chosen CRIR model (see Figure 14). For low-J transitions, J< 3, the total integrated ﬂuxes are similar. However, for high-J transitions, there is a signiﬁcant variation. Therefore, a CRIR chosen to model diﬀuse gas may misrepresent the emission in the dense gas. 5. We showed that the ‘dense’ and ‘diﬀuse’ clouds have similar distributions of the ζ − nphase space. Under the assumption of a general A− nrelationship, the resulting ζ(n) function well-reproduces the average trends shown in the ζ − ndistribution (see Eq. 6 and Figure 4). In summary, we have investigated the eﬀects of CR attenuation on the carbon-cycle chemistry, and compared them to constant CRIR models. The constant CRIR models cannot fully reproduce the behavior of the attenuated model over all regimes of densities, temperatures and species. For the ccoeﬃcients of Table 1 used (Padovani et al. 2018), the best match is found for ζ= 2 ×10s, which reproduces reasonably well the projected emission maps and columns. However, even this model is not well reproducing the local volume densities in the simulation at high densities. Therefore, we recommend the following CRIR prescriptions, in descending order of emphasis: 1. If local (eﬀective) column densities are available to utilizing a column-dependent prescription for the CRIR (e.g. Eq. 1), or, 2. If local column densities are not available, utilizing the analytic prescription in Eq. 6 for the necessary hydrogen-nuclei density for Milky Way-like environments, or 3. If neither of the above are possible, to utilize the constant CRIR, ζ= 2 × 10s, since it resulted in the smallest relative errors in the integrated line emission.