Abstract— With the increasing impact of low inertia due to the high penetration of distributed generation, virtual synchronous generator (VSG) technology has been proposed to improve the stability of the inverter-interfaced distributed generator by providing “virtual inertia”. This paper presents a recent review of virtual inertia control covering significance, features, design principles, and state-of-art inertia strategies from both physical and mathematical perspectives to facilitate the wide application of the VSG. The definition and source of virtual inertia are given to help researchers to establish the concept of “virtual inertia”. Then, this paper covers influencing mechanism studies of virtual inertia to reveal its functions. Also, a design framework of the virtual inertia is established by considering both the characteristics of the control system and the limitation of energy storage systems and renewable energy resources. Finally, several novel adaptive inertia control strategies are reviewed, and some aspects of potential future research are recommended.  Index Terms—Virtual synchronous generator (VSG), inverterinterfaced distributed generator, virtual inertia control, energy storage systems, renewable energy resources.  HE integration of distributed energy resources in the power system is increasing rapidly all over the world [1, 2]. Distributed generation using renewable energy resources, battery energy storage systems, super-capacitor energy storage, etc. is based on fast-response inverters, which decreases power system inertia and brings challenges to the stable operation [36].  In order to address these problems, the control scheme of the virtual synchronous generator (VSG) for inverter-interfaced distributed generators is proposed by incorporating the swing equation of synchronous generators to the control system [7]. In this scheme, the system is provided with additional inertia during transient disturbances through storage units. This virtual inertia emulation could improve frequency response and increase the stability of power systems. Besides, since most VSG controllers are based on the principles of droop controller [8], the VSG control has the advantages of droop control, such as power-sharing among distributed generators, plug-and-play support, and flexible transition between the islanded and the grid-connected mode. The VSG technology is increasing in importance as a solution to large-scale integration of distributed generators. There have been some notable demonstration projects of the application of VSG technology. For instance, the wind power-photovoltaic generation-energy storage system in Zhangbei County, Hebei, China, is the largest VSG demonstration project of photovoltaic generation around the world, where the accumulated installed capacity of VSG reaches to 140 MW [2]. The VSG based photovoltaic systemenergy storage system in Wuxi County, Chongqing, China, provides an example for typical power systems of remote mountain areas [6].  Virtual inertia constant is the core parameter influencing the performance of the VSG. It provides an inertia property that distinguishes the VSG from other control schemes, especially the classic droop control [9, 10]. From the perspective of the mathematical governing equation, the time scale and dynamic characteristics of a VSG control system depend on the range of the inertia [11]. Compared to the rotating inertia of a real synchronous generator, which is fixed when the machine is made, the virtual inertia constant is a control parameter allowing for greater flexibility. Smaller or larger values than that of a real synchronous generator are permitted, and it can be adjusted dynamically to meet with different operational requirements. As for the perspective of physical realization, the virtual inertia emulation relies on the energy storage device, like the battery, super-capacitor, flywheel, rotors, etc. These energy storage units are required to absorb and release energy to decrease power fluctuations following disturbances.  In the past decade, large numbers of works have been published proposing new inertia control strategies [4, 9, 13-17] to improve the stability of a VSG system. Mathematic models have been established in [18-21] to analyze the effect of virtual inertia. As the VSG control scheme becomes a heated issue, a few reviews of the VSG have been reported, as shown in Table I., The research structure in [2] divides the VSG studies into five parts: underlying control, modeling, VSG algorism, stability analysis, and application. Reference [22] presents the main application of the VSG with the combination of photovoltaic (PV) generation, wind power, energy storage system, and the load. Reference [3, 23] summarizes the main methods of stability analysis of the VSG. These studies mainly focus on motivation, control structure, dynamic characteristics, and features of the VSG control system and its stability in the microgrid or distributed-generators-dominated distribution network. However, a systematic and in-depth framework related to physical significance, source, and realization of virtual inertia emulation remains to be established. With the increasing impact of low inertia on grid stability, there is a need to provide a comprehensive review of the virtual inertia control to help researchers identify the research framework and get a better understanding of the concept of “virtual inertia” in the VSG control scheme. 