In meta-analyses, the presence of heterogeneity is common and is seen by many as a nuisance that contributes to estimator variability. However, if we can identify one or more moderating variables, called moderators, that can account for at least some of the heterogeneity, then heterogeneity may give valuable insights. A successful moderator analysis can identify variables, the independent variables (IVs) or moderators, that vary over studies and contribute to variation in the dependent variable (DV) which is the effect measure of interest. No single study may have manipulated a particular variable as an IV, but if that variable varies over studies, and is identiﬁed as a moderator, then the meta-analysis is giving fresh insight that may guide future research. A very useful type of moderator analysis is meta-regression. A meta-regression is analogous to linear regression where we model the DV against moderators of interest. For example, de Bruin et al. (2009) uses the standard quality of participant care as a moderating variable. There are two common types of moderators: numerical moderators and factor moderators. A numerical moderator simply takes numerical values for for each unit change of tuberculosis vaccine. For this meta-analysis a numeric moderator is absolute latitude as a geographical indicator of where a study was conducted. A factor moderator, either ordinal or nominal, takes values for different levels of the moderator. In Colditz et al. (1994), allocation method (random, alternate or systemic) is a factor moderator indicating how treatment was allocated for each study. In general, when we are estimating effects we are interested in moderators which measure sample characteristics (e.g., average or median cohort age). We would not be interested in moderators such as source characteristics (e.g., researcher characteristics) although the question of whether this helps explain some heterogeneity may still be relevant. Card (2015) provides a good discussion of the different moderator types, which may provide useful guidance in regards to identifying potential moderators of interest. Additional information and advice on mrcairns994@gmail.com, luke.prendergast@latrobe.edu.au Meta-regression is often used to form hypotheses about what is associated with heterogeneity in a meta-analysis and to estimate the extent to which effects can vary between cohorts and other distinguishing factors. However, study-level variables, called moderators, that are available and used in the meta-regression analysis will rarely explain all of the heterogeneity. Therefore, measuring and trying to understand residual heterogeneity is still important in a meta-regression, although it is not clear how some heterogeneity measures should be used in the meta-regression context. The coefﬁcient of variation, and its variants, are useful measures of relative heterogeneity. We consider these measures in the context of meta-regression which allows researchers to investigate heterogeneity at different levels of the moderator and also average relative heterogeneity overall. We also provide CIs for the measures and our simulation studies show that these intervals have good coverage properties. We recommend that these measures and corresponding intervals could provide useful insights into moderators that may be contributing to the presence of heterogeneity in a meta-analysis and lead to a better understanding of estimated mean effects. conducting meta-regression analyses is provided in Borenstein et al. (2011); Baker et al. (2009); Higgins & Thompson (2004); Thompson & Higgins (2002). While meta-regression can explain some heterogeneity, it is often the case that there is still residual heterogeneity remaining. Therefore, studying heterogeneity following a meta-regression is still important and we believe that a useful measure of heterogeneity to complement meta-regression is the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) (Takkouche et al. , 1999, 2013). Here, the CV is the the between-studies standard deviation divided by the absolute effect. A small CV suggests that, while heterogeneity may be present, we do not expect the effects to vary much relative to their magnitude. On the other hand, a large CV tells us that the effects can be noticeably different, and even contradictory to one another (e.g., a negative effect in some cases, and positive in others). In this paper we consider using the CV in the context of meta-regression. This can allow us to obtain a deeper understanding of heterogeneity, and explore questions such as ‘at which geographical locations is the vaccine effect likely to be most variable and therefore less reliable?’ and ‘what is the average heterogeneity in this meta-analysis?’. The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we provide background material on the meta-regression model, inverse variance weights estimation and estimators of the heterogeneity variance. In Section 3 we discuss the CV as a measure of heterogeneity. In Section 4 we consider mean CV and associated variances before considering conﬁdence intervals in Section 5. Simulations are provided in Section 6 that illustrate very good coverage of our preferred intervals and examples are also considered before the conclusion in Section 7. In this section we brieﬂy introduce background material on the meta-regression model, inverse variance weights estimation and estimators of the heterogeneity variance. LetY, . . . , Y effect model (FEM) is where rarely justiﬁed, since differences in studies (e.g., treatment dosage, population demographics etc.) can reasonably be assumed to result in differences of the effects to be estimated. These differences in the effects are simply referred to as heterogeneity. To allow for this heterogeneity, we can deﬁne the random effects model (REM) as where γ A simple meta-regression is modelled in a similar way to simple linear regression. That is, we have an intercept ( slope coefﬁcient ( model is whereβ E(Y |x) = β moderator. A pooled effect estimator of β in the FEM and REM in the form of a weighted average of the Y wherew over all studies and the mean effect under the REM. LetW= 1/Var(Y (IVW) estimator uses weights that minimises REM in(1) are be estimators of an effect forkindependent studies. In the presence of zero heterogeneity, the ﬁxed ∼ N(0, v)is the sampling error andvis the variance of the estimatorYfor thei-th study. The FEM is ∼ N(0, τ) is the random effect that allows effects to vary due to unexplained heterogeneity. β) andx, . . . , xare observed moderator values for thekstudies. The simple REM meta-regression = E(Y |x = 0)is the mean effect for an arbitrary study when the moderator is equal to zero. More generally, + β· xand given estimates ofβandβwe can estimate the mean effects for given values of the , . . . , ware weights that sum to one. Note thatE(bβ) = βwhere under the FEM,βis the common effect , we haveVar(Y) = v+ τand soW= 1/(v+ τ). In both cases the IVW estimator and its variance Letβ = [β moderators where the model is the weighted least squares estimator where Note that the weights for the REM depend on needs to be estimated. Once estimated, measures of τ There are many estimators of as methods of moments and unbiased methods. Here, we will describe two methods. Discussion of other approaches can be found in Veroniki et al. (2016); Langan et al. (2019). The most commonly used method is the DL measure proposed by DerSimonian & Laird (1986). LetP authors deﬁne whereQ = to as the DerSimonian and Laird (DL) method. A second estimator that we consider is the REML estimator. Veroniki et al. (2016); Langan et al. (2019) recommend the REML estimator as an estimator for REML estimator can be found in Sidik & Jonkman (2005). Throughout this paper we use the DL and REML estimators of τ. It is important to note however, that the measures will work with any estimator of τ A very common measure of uncertainty in a meta-analysis is I whereσ happen when a typical sampling error variance is large) or large when heterogeneity is small (such as when sampling errors are small). For more on this see Borenstein et al. (2017). Hence, it is important that a measure of heterogeneity relative to total variability in the speciﬁc meta-analysis. A measure which may be very useful for quantifying heterogeneity is the coefﬁcient of variation (CV)(Takkouche et al., 1999, 2013) deﬁned to be A large CV even be contradictory, depending on, e.g., cohorts differences such as age and gender, conditions under which a treatment is implemented etc. On the other hand, a small CV magnitude of the effect, even when noting such differences. Hence, the coefﬁcient of variation can be a useful tool to help describe heterogeneity, perhaps as a complement to other measures such as However, when given the prominent use of Therefore, Cairns & Prendergast (2020) transformed the CV as and provided several conﬁdence intervals (CIs) that had good coverage properties in a wide variety of scenarios. In that paper they discussed several properties which we believe could be important for measures of heterogeneity. Importantly, the paper noted that we can directly link CV , β],W = diag(W, . . . , W)be a diagonal matrix of the un-scaled weights,Xbe the matrix of )whereWis the weight assigned to thei-th study of a ﬁxed-effect (FE) meta-analysis. The PW(Y−bβ)andbβis the meta-estimate of the FE analysis. This method is commonly referred is a typical within-studies variance. However,Ican be small even when heterogeneity is large (i.e. this can indicates that heterogeneity is large relative to the magnitude of the effect. When this occurs the effects can βis very small, the CV can be huge and such cases there may be reluctance to use it. Additionally, and In this section we will brieﬂy discuss the CV in the context of meta-regression. For a given moderator value deﬁneβ variable, such as in multiple linear regression, including factor moderators that require the dummy variables indicating factor level. Then, CV Note that if changes to a moderator can effect signiﬁcant change to the mean effect, then very different values for the CV may be result for different x-s. For example, consider two scenarios: Note that in the above we refer to the fact that we are only estimating relative heterogeneity and our conclusions need to reﬂect that. Hence, to provide some rigour we need CIs which we consider in the next section. Variances for estimators of τ are readily available, and we can easily obtain a variance for where the variances and covariances are given in (4). Takkouche et al. (2013) considered Wald CIs for the log of CV Prendergast (2020) showed that improved intervals were obtained when these were transformed using the logit transformation and some different interval methods to be discussed later. Hence, using their variance of the logit transformed estimation and also the link between this and the log of the CV estimator shown in (6), we have Note in the above we have considered a single ﬁxed assume that CV’s. We now consider several possibilities: a weighted average of mean. For these averages we focus directly on the CV the average logit of estimators of M Letx = [x speciﬁc moderator values observed for the that will be assigned to each moderator values. Finally, let estimates and the corresponding geometric mean are of the form = β+ βxas the true value to be estimated. Note that we can similarly consider more than one moderator since we estimate thatτis small relative toβ, then for thisxwe have a good understanding of the magnitude of the effect (e.g., we estimate that the magnitude ofβwill not vary much for studies conducted for this value of x). since we estimate thatτis large relative toβ, then for thisxwe have a poor understanding of the magnitude of the effect (e.g., we estimate that the magnitude ofβwill vary a lot for studies conducted for this value of x). CVhas been calculated for each level of a moderator, then one overall measure is an average of these , . . . , x]be a vector of moderator values. This can either be chosen by the researcher, or they may be the where ω Letbβbe a column vector of estimated values of the estimated (±1) of the elements of |bβ|. Then, we use the following notation: we let together element-wise), let 1’s in every entry) and · be the usual matrix multiplication. We ﬁnd the following theorem: Theorem 4.1. An approximate variance-covariance matrix for r dependent log transformed CV Similarly, we can calculate a variance-covariance matrix for r dependent CV The proofs of Theorems 4.1 and 4.2 can be found in Appendix A and B respectively. When performing a factor moderator analysis, the method to choose weights is very important. A factor moderator provides a vector (i.e., equal weights across each level of the vector, they could set the weights equal to the proportion of times a value appears in the data set or they could choose the weights based on knowledge of the research area in practice (e.g., giving a small weight to a factor level that is known to represent a very rare occurrence or type). Let us refer to the example seen in the introduction. Looking at the allocation vector in the Colditz et al. (1994) data set, we see there are three levels: random, alternate and systemic. Therefore, if the researcher chooses equal weights we would have researcher chose to deﬁne the weights as the proportion of the times the level appeared, they would have ω≈ 0.154 is represented in the data set, and therefore increasing that weight while decreasing others (e.g., choosing ω= 0.1 and ω Cairns & Prendergast (2020) proposed four methods of calculating CIs in the context of meta-analysis. These methods naturally extend to the meta-regression framework. Using the Team, 2020), we can readily calculate a CI for method of calculating intervals for 5.3 we brieﬂy deﬁne the intervals we use in this paper. In the sections below we deﬁne CIs for Equations 6 and 7. = ··· = ω= 1/r. Finally, we deﬁne the weighted average of CV’s as βatx),bΣbe the variance-covariance matrix ofbβ,sign(bβ)be a column vector of corresponding signs Letbβbe the column vector containing elements(β). Then an approximate variance-covariance andω= 0.308. Finally, the researcher may decide that a random allocation is much more likely than what = 0.2). be a function that is monotonic in bothXandY, where(X, X)is a(1 − α) × 100%CI forX (1 − α/2)whereΦis the standard normal inverse distribution function; e.g.,Φ(0.975) ≈ 1.96. The CI for the form remembering that Prendergast (2020). Similarly, let using the method prescribed in Newcombe (2011); Lloyd (1990) for calculating CIs using CIs for both variables, we see intervals for M This method of calculating CIs works by assigning using the same formula seen in Equation 12 but are calculating a CI(0.8342, 0.8342). A Wald-type (WT) CI is a possible alternative to the substitution methods we describe above. Here we consider 95% CIs and therefore choose levels of conﬁdence. Therefore a WT interval for the logit of M with variance where Var link between the logit of M CIs of mean values may also be of interest. Here we consider CIs for the case where we take a weighted or geometric mean of the estimated matrices can be found in Theorems 4.1 and 4.2. A weighted average of log(CV A CI for a geometric mean of CV where we assume equal weights (i.e., follows: where V In this section we display the results of several simulation studies. These studies were performed using the package (Viechtbauer, 2010) in We randomly generate our thatvis the within-study variance for the simulations. The Studies of the Effectiveness of the BCG Vaccine Against Tuberculosis (BCG) data set (Colditz et al., Y,(Y, Y), is similarly deﬁned. Then the PropImp interval (Newcombe, 2011) forMwould have [L(α), U(α)]and[L(α), U(α)]denote(1 − α) × 100% CIs forτandβrespectively. Then when (cβ)is from(9). We then back transform to the regular scale using the usual methods. Additionally, given the is the variance-covariance matrix deﬁned in Theorem 4.2. 1994) contains 13 studies. We performed simulations using the numeric moderator absolute latitude and a second set of simulations using the factor moderator allocation. The next data set, also containing 13 studies, was the Standard Care Quality (SCQ) and HAART-adherence (HAART) data set (de Bruin et al., 2009). For simulations based on this data set we used the standard quality of care as a moderating variable. We also performed simulations using the factor moderator ethnicity as a moderating variable. Due to the size of the data sets we do not describe them fully here. However they can be viewed using the code provided on our OSF page. We will now discuss the results of the above simulations. We begin by providing the results of the simulations using numeric moderators. For simplicity, when computing intervals for a speciﬁed moderator value, we have set the moderator values equal to those observed. However, it is of course possible to choose any value for the moderators. Table 1: Coverages calculated using 10,000 trials with moderator values chosen to be the absolute latitude values found in the Colditz et al. (1994) data set. In Table 1 we see coverages for four types of CI for based on the Colditz et al. (1994) example. In general, coverage is strong for each method and typically slightly more conservative when using the REML estimator of slightly liberal. The PropImp intervals provide strong coverage for each value of the moderator and the intervals based on the REML estimator tend to be slightly more conservative than the intervals calculated with the DL estimator. This is potentially due to the negative bias shown in the DL estimator when τ Table 2: Average widths calculated using 10,000 trials with absolute latitude as a moderating variable. Note that the widths for CV α[REML] (CV α[REML] (M Prop (CV Prop [REML] (CV Prop (M Prop [REML] (M WT (CV WT [REML] (CV WT (M WT [REML] (M In Table 2 we show the average widths corresponding to the coverages seen in Table 1. We show results for CV based intervals and WT intervals are calculated using medians. . We note that particularly for smallx-s the CVintervals are very wide. However, this is because the CVvalues are all extremely large, e.g., from 10000 trials the average estimates of the transformed versions M Table 3: Coverages calculated using 10,000 trials with moderator values chosen to be the standard quality of care values found in the de Bruin et al. (2009) data set. α[REML] 0.953 0.953 0.948 0.947 0.946 0.943 0.939 0.932 0.938 0.940 0.942 0.942 0.946 Prop [REML] 0.973 0.973 0.974 0.974 0.973 0.974 0.975 0.974 0.974 0.974 0.974 0.974 0.973 Table 4: Average widths calculated from 10,000 trials using SCQ as a moderator. The data was simulated from the de Bruin et al. (2009) data set. Note that the widths for CV medians. In Table 3 we again see typically good coverage when the settings from de Bruin et al. (2009) are used. While theα-adjusted coverages are too liberal with the DL, coverage is again slightly more conservative using the REML estimator. We consider the average widths of the intervals in Table 4. We see that the size of the CIs can vary with average widths appearing quite small across the different methods in comparison to the widths seen in Table 2. This is because the estimates to the CV α-adjusted intervals are the narrowest. However, narrow interval width comes at the expense of the intervals being too liberal to slightly liberal as we saw in Table 1, in particular when using the DL estimator. That said, the slightly liberal coverage when using the REML estimator and narrow CIs than the PropImp approach means that the intervals with the REML estimator have performed reasonably well. The slightly wider PropImp intervals align with the slightly conservative coverage seen in Table 3. In general, we see that the widths of the REML intervals are slightly wider than the DL based intervals but this also corresponds to closer-to-nominal interval estimator. Hence, when considering both coverage and width, we recommend using the REML estimator. We also saw that in some examples, huge widths of the intervals were often obtained for CVestimation and we noted that this was because of large relative heterogeneity leading to an extremely large upper bound. Hence, this is one reason why intervals for this, we see in the top-left plot of Figure 1 a plot of the DL estimator for set but deﬁned the moderating variable to be integer values between 10 and 60 inclusive. The WT intervals are the widest (particularly for smaller moderator values) followed by the PropImp intervals, with the the shortest intervals. This is what we would expect given our coverages seen in Table 1. The issues with unbounded become obvious in the bottom-left plot in Figure 1 where we can see the upper bounds of the CIs are very large. In the top-right plot of Figure 1 we see the observed estimated effects against absolute latitude. This helps us highlight the issues with the large values of CV as is the case for small moderator values, the CV larger. Hence, we can still portray very large relative heterogeneity using bound of one), without the nuisance of reporting extremely large (even inﬁnite) values for CV 0.951 0.950 0.944 0.943 0.941 0.937 0.933 0.928 0.934 0.935 0.937 0.937 0.942 τ(similar results for the REML estimator). In this example, we used the Colditz et al. (1994) data Figure 1: These plots display well as several associated CIs and transforming the CV measures to the [0, 1] scale when the effect (β problematic for factor moderators which are less likely to have a viable moderator value that results in an estimated effect approximately equal to zero, due to the non-continuous nature of the regression model. In Table 5 we display the results of simulations for same for M Table 5 results show generally good coverage though the WT intervals can be quite liberal (e.g., 0.899). In this section we consider the results of simulations performed for geometric and weighted means. The PropImp methods no longer have only two substitutions to perform (i.e. the interval for butr + 1 and M, however the width will differ. interval substitutions (one forτand then one for each of the moderator values chosen to form the average Table 5: Coverages and median widths calculated using 10,000 trials with several factor moderators using CV both DL and REML estimators of et al. (2009). of the effects where intervals based on the variance matrices presented in Theorems 4.2 and 4.1. We consider results for two factor moderators (allocation and ethnicity) and two numeric moderators (absolute latitude and standard quality of care). In these simulations we found that using the REML estimator of We performed simulations for the numeric moderators, based on the initial data before replicating the data set once, twice and three times (to increase the number of studies present in the analysis). For example, the Ablat results seen in Table 6 contains 13 studies, we replicate the data once to run simulations with k = 39 studies and three times for simulations with k = 52 studies. Table 6: Coverages calculated using 10,000 trials with various moderating variables using CV REML estimators of Colditz et al. (1994); de Bruin et al. (2009). In this example we chose 20 values from between the minimum of the corresponding moderator to the maximum (not including zero). Here, the meta-regression (by adding replications of the original data set). In Table 6 we consider the results of several simulations. Note that the coverage of moderators are the same because the weights are equal in these simulations. We begin by showing the coverage for a geometric mean and a weighted average for two different factor simulations (described above). We see that coverage can be quite liberal for the Continuing on, we display the results for two sets of continuous numeric moderators. Looking at the Colditz et al. (1994) results, the The coverages for the de Bruin et al. (2009) data set are generally good with waCV intervals tending to be liberal. In this section we will give the reader an example of how these measures may be used in practice. First, consider the data set seen in Colditz et al. (1994). Remember that this data set contains 13 studies and we use absolute latitude as a moderating variable (see Section 4 for more detailed information). Performing a meta-regression, we see the following: bβ= 0.260 value of absolute latitude. We see these results in Table 7. Table 7: Contains values for heterogeneity measures when using absolute latitude as a moderating variable. These are examples of output a researcher might receive when using these measures in practice. CIs using DL for speciﬁc moderators using PropImp intervals and a CI for the weighted average: 13 : CV 55 : CV waCV = 0.742[0.000, 1.863]. These results tell us that heterogeneity relative to the size of the effect is larger for smaller values of absolute latitude. Hence, effects measured at larger latitudes (e.g., 55) would be relatively stable in terms of magnitude. However, for lower latitude values such as within the tropics, the magnitude of the effect may vary considerably to the extent that small, moderate, or large effects may be observed. Hence, while the effects themselves may vary similarly at any given latitude, given that we are interested in magnitude of the effects then we need to consider heterogeneity relative to the size of the effect. These results indicate to the researcher that results of the usage of this vaccine near the equator could vary considerably. In addition, further research into the causes (and subsequent ﬁxes) of the variation in the effectiveness of the vaccine near the equator could be considered. We consider the use of the CV in meta-analysis in the context of meta-regression. We have used the CV for ﬁxed values of the moderator, as well as means of the CV over several moderator values. We also considered transformed values of the CV and associated CIs as was considered by Cairns & Prendergast (2020). It is of interest to be able to assess how much adding moderators affects the amount of explained heterogeneity of a meta-analysis relative to the size of the effect. This is particularly useful when such an investigation is used in conjunction with a consideration of how much that moderator affects the uncertainty of the meta-analysis (i.e., a discussion of generating discussions. CIs for for CV, addition to I All data and code used in this paper are available at https://osf.io/f68za/ waCVintervals show liberal coverage which increases with the number of studies. For thewaLCV intervals, coverage tends to begin conservatively and become closer to the nominal as more studies are added. ,bβ= −0.029andbτ= 0.063. A quick calculation provides the values of CV,MandM, for each = [0.445, >> 1000] and M= [0.308, 1.000]. = [0.094, 0.735] and M= [0.086, 0.424]. MandMprovide reliable, slightly conservative intervals in all cases. Thus, we would recommend that in , either CVand Mshould be reported, along with corresponding CIs. A.1. Proof of Theorem 4.1 We will prove Theorem 4.1 by calculating the log(bτ ) − log(| that in general d|x|/(dx) = sign(x), then a ﬁrst order Taylor approximation has the form where an approximate matrix for two dependent log(CV Thus a variance-covariance matrix for k dependent log( By introducing the notations just prior to Theorem 4.1, it is simple to represent this in matrix form. A.2. Proof of Theorem 4.2 Recall the methods used in Appendix A. We will prove Theorem 4.2 by calculating the d|x|/(dx) = sign(x), then a ﬁrst order Taylor approximation has the form bβ|)andbτ =bτ(i.e. so that we considercCVa function ofbτand writecCV=bτ/|bβ|). Noting log(cCV)≈ log(τ) − log(|β|) + (bτ− τ) ·12 · τ− (bβ− β) ·1|β|· sign(β), Covlog(τ) − log(|β|) + (bτ− τ) ·12 · τ− (bβ− β) ·1|β|· sign(β), bβare independent so that the second and third terms above are zero, and since E[bτ] ≈ τand E[bβ] ≈ β, Cov[ log(cCV), log(cCV)] ≈ Cov(bτ− τ) ·12 · τ, (bτ− τ) ·12 · τ andbτ =bτ(i.e., we considercCVa function ofbτand writecCV=bτ/|bβ|). Noting that in general where an approximate matrix for two dependent CV Thus a variance-covariance matrix for introducing the notations just prior to Theorem 4.1, it is simple to represent this in matrix form. ] ≈ τand E[bβ] ≈ β, then by the deﬁnition of the covariance function