Richard Ruiz, Institute of Nuclear Physics – Polish Academy of Sciences (IFJ PAN), ul. Radzikowskiego, Kraków 31-342, Poland Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology (CP3), Université Catholique de Louvain, Chemin du Cyclotron, B-1348 Louvain la Neuve, Belgium Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna e INFN, Sezione di Bologna, via Irnerio 46, I-40126 Bologna, Italy E-mail: antonio.costantini@uclouvain.be, fabio.maltoni@uclouvain.be, olivier.mattelaer@uclouvain.be, rruiz@ifj.edu.pl Abstract: Due to the inclination for forward gauge radiation, lepton colliders beyond a few TeV are eﬀectively electroweak (EW) boson colliders, suggesting the treatment of EW bosons as constituents of high-energy leptons. In the context of a muon collider, we revisit the validity of W and Z parton distribution functions (PDFs) at leading order in 2 → n process. We systematically investigate universal and quasi-universal power-law and logarithmic corrections that arise when deriving (polarized) weak boson PDFs in the collinear limit. We go on to survey a multitude of 2 → n processes at larized and unpolarized EW boson fusion/scattering. To conduct this study, we report a public implementation of the Eﬀective W/Z and Weizsäcker-Williams Approximations, which we collectively call the Eﬀective Vector Boson Approximation, into the Monte Carlo event generator MadGraph5_aMC@NLO. This implementation lays the groundwork for developing matrix-element matching prescriptions involving EW parton showers and renormalized EW PDFs. To further with this agenda, we give recommendations on using W/Z PDFs. Keywords: Eﬀective W Approximation, Electroweak Boson PDFs, Muon Colliders, Helicity Polarization, Monte Carlo Tools 2 The Eﬀective Vector Boson Approximation for µ 2.1 A factorization theorem for µ 2.2 q Within the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics, the existence of gauge bosons with nonzero masses is one of the deﬁning characteristics that distinguishes the electroweak (EW) sector from perturbative quantum chromodynamics (pQCD). However, at momentum transfers scales (Q) far above the EW breaking scale, v = are eﬀectively massless, thereby softening this distinction. More precisely, at Q where M terms that scale as δσ ∼ (M processes and analogously 1 → n collider experiments, collinear, t-channel emissions of weak bosons from initial-state partons, as shown schematically in Fig. 1, can be factorized into a type of weak boson parton distribution function constituents of high-energy lepton and hadron beams [5–7]. initial-state W/Z boson emissions out of matrix elements (MEs) and into PDFs has several beneﬁts. Like heavy quark factorization [8–15] and the factorization of inelastic photons, i.e., the Weizsäcker-Williams Approximation [16, 17], the EWA signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes ME computations and phase space integration, particularly in the infrared limits of phase space. Even in the absence of singularities, such factorization may be necessary to avoid numerical instabilities in real calculations when scale hierarchies are present, e.g., to avoid a large collinear logarithm when Q to model numerous scenarios, including weak vector boson fusion/scattering (VBF) [18–21], heavy quark production from W g-scattering [22, 23], and heavy lepton production [23]. invoking the EWA means losing knowledge about: (i) the recoil kinematics/transverse momentum (p scale as O(M polarizations, which scale as O(M mass eigenstates, i.e., γ ever, in principle, extending highly successful matching and merging techniques pioneered for QCD and QED [26–29] oﬀer a starting path to resolve some of these drawbacks. and (M Such scales will also be commonplace at energy-frontier colliders proposed to succeed the LHC [34–40]. This rings particularly true for multi-TeV µ rate is so dominant the collider acts eﬀectively as a “high-luminosity EW boson collider” [41] and shows promising sensitivity to SM and beyond the SM (BSM) physics [25, 41–55]. phase, some aspect of collinear factorization must survive at these colliders in the limit that Known as the Eﬀective W/Z Approximation (EWA) [5, 6], the partitioning of collinear, The EWA, however, also comes at a cost. Like other instances of collinear factorization, Notably, momentum transfers needed to neglect power corrections of the form (p/Q) /Q), where k > 0, are already obtainable with VBF at the LHC [30–33]. By virtue of the EW sector obeying a local SU(2)⊗U(1)symmetry in the unbroken )→ 0 and (M/Q)→ 0. This is evident from the formulations of factorization Figure 1. Diagrammatic representation of µ → V theorems and Sudakov exponentiation in QED and pQCD, which at times rely more on the presence of multiple, well-separated (hierarchical) mass scales than on being unbroken gauge theories [56–63]. Clearly, being an Abelian/non-Abelian or weakly/strongly coupled theory is less crucial for suﬃciently inclusive processes. At the same time, diﬀerences between collinear factorization in pQCD and the EW theory must exist since lepton and hadron beams are not composed of weak isospin-averaged states [4, 64–66]. sider a framework that combines the EWA for helicity-polarized W and Z bosons with the Weizsäcker-Williams Approximation for helicity-polarized photons. We collectively label this the Eﬀective Vector Boson Approximation (EVA). context of a multi-TeV µ polarized) γ/W/Z PDFs in 2 → n process. Such processes that we consider include: associated and many-Higgs production, many-boson production, as well as associated and multi-top production. We extend recent studies [21, 25, 41, 67] by investigating universal and quasi-universal corrections to weak boson PDFs that appear naturally in their derivations. Speciﬁcally, we study universal power corrections of the form (p the accuracy of collinear factorization, and quasi-universal power corrections of the form tantly, we also consider the role of universal and quasi-universal logarithmic corrections of the form [α weak boson PDFs is deﬁned in terms of transverse momentum (p is in addition to studying the role of helicity in both total and diﬀerential cross sections. Q ∼ 1 TeV; for larger Q, we report agreement between full and approximated MEs when scale uncertainty bands, which can be large, are taken into account. More explicitly: we ﬁnd that computations with the EWA can reproduce total and diﬀerential results within (large) scale uncertainties, so long as factorization-breaking power corrections are suﬃciently suppressed. Even for asymptotically large energies, we ﬁnd scale uncertainties remain large, As a step to better understanding collinear factorization in the EW sector, we con- /Q), which spoil the accuracy of the Goldstone Equivalence Theorem [68, 69]. Impor- We ﬁnd strong sensitivity to power corrections when hard-scattering scales Q are below demonstrating a need for renormalization group (RG) evolution in our factorization theorem for high-energy muon collisions. To strengthen the parallels with pQCD, we give a proof-of-principle demonstration of matrix element matching with transverse weak boson PDFs and full MEs. Given these criteria, we go on to survey nearly two dozen 2 → n VBF processes with the EVA in µ their scale uncertainties are presented for both helicity-polarized and unpolarized initial states. To conduct this study, we report an implementation of the EVA into the generalpurpose Monte Carlo event generator MadGraph5_aMC@NLO (mg5amc). Notably, this public implementation lays the groundwork for developing QCD-like matching prescriptions with initial/ﬁnal state EW boson radiation as well as (polarized and unpolarized) PDFs that are RG evolved via the EW theory and pQCD. To further with this agenda, we also give some recommendations on using weak boson PDFs in high-energy lepton collisions. the EVA formalism used throughout this work and present a factorization theorem for EW boson scattering in high-energy µ polarized EW boson PDFs is given in App. A. In Sec. 3 we document our computational setup and numerical values for SM inputs. Sec. 4 is the ﬁrst of two principle sections and where we revisit the validity of the EWA. Sec. 5 is the second of two principle sections and where we give a survey of 2 → n VBF processes in the EVA. We conclude in Sec. 6. There, we give an extended discussion of our ﬁndings, reﬂecting particularly on the parallels we ﬁnd with more subtle aspects of PDFs in QCD, e.g., the phenomenon of “precocious scaling.” Finally, we provide some recommendations on using weak PDFs in high-energy lepton collisions in Sec. 6.1. App. B provides some instructions for reproducing our results and using (un)polarized EW boson PDFs in mg5amc. In this section, we summarize the EVA, i.e., the framework in which we work, and its use in evaluating scattering cross sections in many-TeV µ the EVA is, in principle, applicable to any lepton-lepton, lepton-hadron, and hadron-hadron collider conﬁguration. Extension to other colliders, however, may require substitutions of gauge coupling charges and/or convolutions with additional PDFs [5]. In Sec. 2.1, we state a factorization theorem that will be the basis for all our numerical results and validation checks. In Sec. 2.2, we list the q of EW bosons in muons at leading order (LO). Finally, we document for the completeness in Sec. 2.3 the PDFs for SM neutrinos from muons. The PDFs quoted below are derived in a technical appendix; see App. A for details. To described the fully diﬀerential production of an n-body, ﬁnal state F with momenta {p via the high-energy VBF process V EW gauge bosons, in µ The remainder of this work continues in the following order: In Sec. 2, we summarize the EVA. In practice, this means working from a factorization theorem given by in association with an arbitrary state X. Explicitly, X consists of at least two leptons l, where l = µ The summation runs over all polarized EW boson V Formally speaking, when the collection of states {V right-handed (RH) states ν lihood that an unpolarized muon µ E(1, 0, 0, ±1) contains a “parton” V with helicity λ, mass M transverse momentum p generally M as the ultraviolet regulator of the PDF. Physically, µ the norm of the space-like momentum transfer q = (p µcan be interpreted as the upper bound on the p (phase space) integrals over the momentum fractions ξ less) kinematic threshold variable τ the (V V Lorentz-invariant phase space measure dP S hard-scattering process V Due to this equality, we use the terms “hard-scattering system” and “(V V changeably. The helicity-polarized cross sections can be computed from the formula [70] Here, σ is the muon-level (beam-level) inclusive cross section for the production of F For beams k =1,2, the quantities f(ξ, µ) are the PDFs that describe the like-√ )-system has insuﬃcient energy to produce the n-body state F. The separately In Eq. (2.2), dˆσ/dP Sis the totally diﬀerential, “parton-level” cross section for the Here, λ(x, y, z) = (x − y − z) for the masses of initial-state particles. Unlike traditional leading-twist approximations that neglect masses of initial-state partons, the ME M(V nonzero M unlike the scattering of unpolarized partons in unpolarized beams, no spin-averaging factor for initial-states V PDFs for helicity-polarized partons. The summation in Eq. (2.5) runs over all discrete degrees of freedom (dof) related to F, e.g., electric charge and color helicity multiplicities. Importantly, if the summations for V V an infrared-safe reference frame must be speciﬁed to deﬁne the helicities. For further details on evaluating helicity-polarized cross sections, particularly in relation to PDFs for polarized partons and polarized parton showers, see Ref. [70]. are both related to enforcing large separations of scales in V is that weak bosons are massive but that the invariant mass of the (V much larger, i.e., M polarization vectors, which scale as ε vanishing when contracted with µ → l currents. We reiterate that including initial-state parton masses here diﬀers from typical treatments of QCD partons in hadron collisions, which are assumed massless in the absence of specialized schemes [12–15]. Outside this limit, Eq. (2.2) receives quasi-universal power corrections of the form (M k > 1, the size of which are quantiﬁed in Sec. 4.2. The qualiﬁer “quasi-universal” refers to the fact that such corrections originate from the derivation of f appear for any V Z. It is worth noting that the Goldstone Equivalence Theorem requires that these terms be small [68, 69]; for further insights on relationship, see Refs. [4, 71–73]. shallow angles in µ → l + V but necessary condition for collinear factorization in gauge theories [63, 74]. As in QCD computations, universal power corrections of the form (p incorporated by higher-order perturbative computations, e.g., next-to-leading order (NLO) in α “universal” here refers to the fact that such corrections originate from the derivation of both factorization theorem is not scale invariant in an RG evolution sense. That is to say, the anomalous dimensions associated with PDFs f those associated with the partonic cross section ˆσ(V Mellin-transforming Eq. (2.2), and then taking the derivative with respect to log µ its present form, Eq. (2.2) is subject to universal and quasi-universal logarithmic corrections of the form O[(α and F, respectively, then the square of M is not Lorentz invariant. In such cases, When deriving Eq. (2.2), a number of assumptions are made. Two important ones The second important assumption is the stipulation that EW bosons are emitted at or α, parton showers, or ME matching to higher leg multiplicities. To be explicit, and fPDFs, meaning that they are present for any VVscattering process. Notably, the absence of any EW Sudakov form factor in Eq. (2.2) implies that the coupling constant, due to working at only LO in the EW theory. Naïvely, one may argue that these corrections are sub-leading since they are coupling suppressed. However, g not a small number and collinear logarithms can compensate for this. For instance: taking µ= 1 − 10 TeV implies corrections from (α While we ultimately report in Sec. 4 a prescription for obtaining agreement between full and EWA-based calculations, the scale uncertainties reported there and in Sec. 5 undercut our ﬁndings. For precision computations, an RG-improved version EVA is necessary. However, incorporating these improvements, including the various subtleties related to γ mixing [4, 25, 50, 75–78], which we neglect, is left to to future work. formulation; compare for example Refs. [5–7, 20, 79–81]. As discussed in Sec. 4.4, seemingly innocuous conceptual diﬀerences can lead to substantial numerical diﬀerences in real computations. Therefore, we now summarize the PDFs used in this study. In PDFs for W the momentum transfer in µ(p away by l. While the two quantities are related by q the fraction of µ’s energy held by V diﬀer analytically. Consequentially, for ﬁxed z, λ, and µ due a relative contribution that scale as δf the large-ξ limit and corresponds to a nonzero q been sporadically discussed throughout the literature [18–20, 22, 23, 67, 80, 82] but not systematically compared. In light of this, we investigate both sets of PDFs. Lastly, the expressions for EW boson PDFs fdepend strongly on their precise and p-evolved collinear EW PDFs − p)< 0 propagated by V, or by the squared transverse momentum pcarried For the couplings in Table 1, and assuming qevolution, the LO PDFs for polarized , Z} from LH (f) and RH (f) fermions in the hard scattering frame are Table 1. EW chiral couplings and coupling strength normalizations used in the EVA for fermions f, f To obtain the LO PDF for γ make the replacement M scheme, we construct polarized EW boson PDFs for unpolarized muon beams, denoted by As a technical note, both schemes are available in mg5amc (see App. B for details) but stress that RG evolution of EW boson PDFs from leptons is not yet supported. transversely polarized V dependent and thus is labeled “quasi-universal.” The absence of scale evolution in PDFs for longitudinally polarized V scale uncertainty in pQCD, e.g., three-point scale variation, are not applicable to longitudinally polarized weak boson PDFs. In principal, one can obtain f or vice versa, with appropriately chosen µ with weak isospin charge (T)= ±1/2 and electric charge Q, with normalization Q= −1. Choosing instead to integrate over pleads analogously to the following PDFs for V: , from those PDFs for polarized muons, denote by f, through the relation Diﬀerences between the two sets of PDFs appear only in the collinear logarithms for we note that absorbing factors of (1 − ξ) into factorization scales is common practice in Soft-Collinear Eﬀective Field Theory (SCET) [83, 84]. We reiterate that the PDFs here are only accurate to O(α such as µ We brieﬂy note that the derivation of W existence of neutrino PDFs. As we are working in the SM, only massless, LH neutrinos (and RH antineutrinos) exist. Therefore, by probability conservation, the µ at leading logarithmic accuracy when evolved by q As we are interested in VBF at µ PDFs from muon beams; for recent discussion on these PDFs, see Ref. [25]. Moreover, while we have also implemented these PDFs into the public release of mg5amc, access to them is temporarily restricted due to the unregulated divergence at ξ → 1. Likewise, throughout this study, we neglect the importance of µ → µ PDFs due to the complication of soft/collinear photon emissions, which necessitates resummation [85]; we refer readers to studies by Refs. [50, 85–87, 87, 88]. In this section we summarize the computational framework used in this study. Here, we only document the Monte Carlo (MC) tool chain and its tuning. Details on the EVA itself and usage in mg5amc are documented in Sec. 2, App. A, and App. B. version 3.3.0) generator MadGraph5_aMC@NLO [89, 90]. In this software suite, fully diﬀerential events are obtained from tree-level ME that are constructed [91] and evaluated [92] using helicity amplitudes deﬁned in the HELAS basis [93], with QCD color algebra decomposed according to color ﬂow [94]. Helicity-polarized ME are obtained by truncating spin-averaging over initial-state states and/or spin-summing over ﬁnal-state states [70]. Analysis of partonlevel events is handled by MadAnalysis5 [95, 96]. → γ→ µand µ→ γ→ W, which appear ﬁrst at NLO, are neglected. To simulate high-pmuon collisions, we employ an updated (released in the future as For all ME and PDFs, we take the following EW inputs and masses [97] This implies a QED coupling of α EW couplings EW inputs are varied but we do not RG-evolve them. Importantly, we have structured mg5amc such that EW couplings and masses present in EW boson PDFs are set to those values stipulated in the param_card.dat conﬁguration ﬁle. Changes to EW inputs in this ﬁle are automatically propagated into EW boson PDFs. We reiterate that all ME and PDFs assume non-zero W and Z boson masses. We use the light lepton masses for the collinear logarithms contained in the γ the γ massless e A chief goal of factorization is to simplify in a systematic manner complicated, multiscale MEs that describe many-body processes into a set of simpler, 1-to-2-scale MEs. In practice, this divide-and-conquer approach improves the eﬃciency and stability of numerical computations. Importantly, the formal perturbative accuracy of factorized calculations can also be improved through quasi-universal RGE methods, e.g., Sudakov resummation and DGLAP evolution. For the speciﬁc case of VBF in multi-TeV µ collinear µ → V of an inherent 3-scale, 2 → (n + 2) scattering process (the three scales being M universal power corrections of the order O(p from expanding the ME for transversely and longitudinally polarized weak bosons in µ → Vl splittings, as well as universal and quasi-universal logarithmic corrections of the order O(α classes of corrections can be reduced via standard techniques, e.g., higher-order ﬁxed order calculations and Sudakov resummation. In the absence of such improvements, however, there exist theoretical uncertainties in the formulation of weak PDFs that we now explore. In Sec. 4.1 we describe our common setup to study power-law and logarithmic corrections. We then study O(M in Sec. 4.3. A subclass of O(α Finally, in Sec. 4.5, we give a proof-of-principle demonstration of matrix element matching with transversely polarized weak boson PDFs and explore O(p M= 1.16639 × 10GeV m= 510.9989461 × 10GeV and m= 105.6583745 × 10 PDFs and are independent of param_card.dat. While it is technically possible use /µin MEs, in this paper we choose to use massive leptons. ) into the product of two 2-scale computations (Mwith µ∼ p, and Mwith ) involving process-independent PDFs and process-dependent 2 → n MEs. As described in Sec. 2.1 and App. A, the EWA is accurate up to universal and quasilog(µ/M)), which stem from working at LO in the EW theory. In principle, both phase space cuts of Eq. (4.4). Lower: The cross sections for the analogous processes using the full 2 → 4 or 2 → 5 ME. No restrictions are applied to the invariant masses M(HH) and M (γγγ). To quantify uncertainties that stem from factorizing polarized EW bosons from initial-state Following Ref. [41], we work with e hilation diagrams in a gauge-invariant manner. As such channels have sizable contributions to inclusive cross sections, their removal helps isolate the VBF sub-processes. Under the EWA, these beam-level processes correspond to the partonic processes In practice, we restrict ourselves throughout this section to the EWA helicity conﬁgurations polarizations that drive them. For polarizations λ we ﬁnd by explicit calculation [70] that 97% − 99% of HH production in the EWA is dominated by longitudinally polarized W 4 − 30 TeV. In contrast, γγγ production is driven at the 97% − 99% level, albeit with a large scale uncertainty, by transversely polarized W where T, T W→ HH, with scale uncertainties [%] and polarization fractions [%], in eµcollisions s = 4, 14, and 30 TeV. Middle: The same but for the process WW→ γγγ, assuming the l emissions into PDFs, we chose the two benchmark processes We consider these speciﬁc processes and conﬁgurations due to the high purity of helicity In making this distinction between (0, 0) and (T, T sible diﬀerences of the EWA as applied to longitudinal and transverse polarizations. Many other processes, such as heavy Higgs production and top quark pair production, receive comparable contributions from multiple polarization conﬁgurations, which we believe can lead to ambiguities in interpreting the following comparisons. collinear factorization scale to be half the partonic c.m. energy, given by Three-point scale uncertainties for W range ζ ∈ {0.5, 1.0, 2.0}. For representative collider energies beam-level cross sections under the EWA (σ fractions [%] for W For comparison, we show in the lower panel of Table 2 the corresponding cross sections We start our presentation on EWA uncertainties with what we ﬁnd to be the most telling: that the accuracy of EWA cross sections for VBF depends crucially on the size of (M power corrections. To show this, we plot in Fig. 2(a) the invariant mass distributions at√ s = 4 TeV of the (HH)-system using the full 2 → 4 ME (solid) and the EVA 2 → 2 ME (dashed). We assume two scenarios: one where the SM Higgs vev is its usual value√ 2hΦi = v is reduced by a factor 10 (light, upper curves), i.e., where In the small-vev scenario, we keep M in the Thomson limit. This implies M putations are in agreement for M(HH) & 1 TeV. Below this threshold, the EWA curve signiﬁcantly overestimate the full ME. In the lowest bins, the diﬀerences between the curves reach approximately factors of 3 − 5. This excess in the EVA prediction accounts for the diﬀerences in cross sections reported in Table 2. As seen in the ME of Eq. (A.56) in App. A, diﬀerences between the full ME and f with expanding in powers of (M portantly, we can rule out a meaningful dependence on µ almost exclusively by W the disparity between the full and approximated MEs, we turn to the reduced-vev case. Remarkably, if we reduce M the full ME disappears to within MC statistical uncertainties. the invariant mass distribution of the (γγγ)-system for the full (solid) and EWA MEs. As For the γγγ process, we focus on PDF evolution by virtuality (q) and set the baseline ) using the full MEs, i.e., without the EWA. The sizable diﬀerences between σand , as well as the large scale uncertainties of the EWA result, will now be discussed. Focusing ﬁrst on the SM case, we clearly see that the EWA and the full ME com- The same scenarios are presented for γγγ production in Fig. 2 (b). There, we plot W→ γγγ is driven by WWscattering, there is an ambiguity associated with predicted by the full 2 → 4 ME (solid) and the EWA W assuming the SM vev√ 2hΦi = v EWA with µ our choice for µ envelope spans a huge gap that sandwiches the full ME for M (γγγ) & 750 GeV. This large scale variation can be understood by considering the logarithms in the W themselves. For a ﬁxed M(γγγ), the ratio of the two EVA distributions is given by obtain roughly the respective ratios {17, 4.9, 3.1, 2.8}, in agreement with the distribution. For M(γγγ) . 750 GeV, the full ME curve sits just above the EWA envelope. This is in contrast to W We attribute this to W than W the full ME and f W→ γγγ, assuming the ﬁducial cuts in Eq. (4.4), and for the WW→ γγγ ME in the ˆs (dash) and µ=ˆs/4 (dot). In the SM case (light curves), the scale uncertainty For the representative triphoton invariant masses M(γγγ) ∈ {0.5, 1, 2, 2.5} TeV, we Wscattering. As seen in the ME of Eq. (A.47) in App. A, diﬀerences between /M(HH)). However, there is no second expansion in powers of (M/M(γγγ)) as one has for the f approaches the EWA curve for µ is an improved agreement between the full and EWA distributions for M(γγγ) & 250 GeV. For even lower invariant masses, the full ME is again higher than the EWA band. Second, we ﬁnd that the full ME converges to the EWA curve for µ Third is the appearance of a smaller scale uncertainty envelope, in accordance with Eq. (4.7). Numerically, this follows from the fact that for small variations of the argument x, the quantity log(x) varies less when x is large than when x is near unity. Physically, this means that in the reduced-vev case, typical M(γγγ) are further away from the W ’s mass threshold, and therefore is less sensitive to O(log(M this scenario, we stress that the scale uncertainty band remains sizable. For instance: using Eq. (4.7) and our benchmark values for M (γγγ), we obtain the ratios {2.3, 2.0, 1.8, 1.7}. This indicates that for realistic EW boson masses, one must go to asymptotically large M(γγγ) in order to obtain O(10% −20%) uncertainties. From an alternative perspective, the large µ Eq. (2.2) by an EW Sudakov form factor and/or RG evolution for weak boson PDFs, as studied in Refs. [4, 25, 50, 75, 78, 98–100]. corrections of the form (M nally polarized weak bosons. Distributions also suggest a weaker dependence on power corrections when scattering transversely polarized weak bosons. We attribute this diﬀerence to the diﬀerent expansions needed to derive longitudinal and transverse weak boson PDFs: W pansion. Altogether, this points to evidence of the EWA’s success for both transverse and longitudinal V ther demonstrate this at the level of cross sections, we show in Table 3 the same quantities Table 3. Same as Table 2 but requiring M(HH) > 1 TeV and M(γγγ) > 1 TeV. In the reduced-vev scenario (dark curves), we observe several noteworthy features. First From these distributions, we can conclude that the EWA is acutely sensitive to power PDFs require a single power expansion whereas WPDFs require a double ex- Figure 3. (a) The invariant mass distribution M(HH) of the process W by the full 2 → 4 ME (solid) and the EVA W curves) and 14 TeV (upper dark curves). (b) Same but for the M (γγγ) distribution of the process EWA with µ as in Table 2 but require also that M(HH) > 1 TeV and M(γγγ) > 1 TeV. The improved agreement between the full and EWA computations is due to the cuts on M(W W ). In light of the above, we consider now the impact collider energy on the EWA’s accuracy. Increasing fractions ξ with M an enlargement of collinear regions of phase space. (ii) For a ﬁxed hard-scattering scale enhancement of soft logarithms similarly indicates an enlargement of soft regions of phase space. (These soft logarithms appear after integration of ξ the (HH)-system and (b) the (γγγ)-system at assuming the full MEs for the processes in Eq. (4.1) (solid), and the EWA MEs for the processes in Eq. (4.3) (dash). For the W envelop obtained by setting µ We start with the anticipated jump in cross section for increasing and the full MEs, we ﬁnd that increasing the collider energy by a factor of 3.5 causes all total cross sections to increase by about a factor of 3 (see Table 2). Increases are much W→ γγγ, assuming the ﬁducial cuts in Eq. (4.4), and for the WW→ γγγ ME in the , increasing the collider energy leads to probing smaller ξand ξ. The corresponding To explore these eﬀects, we present in Fig. 3 the invariant mass distributions of (a)√ Focusing on the M(HH) distribution in Fig. 3(a), several observations can be made.√ more dramatic at the diﬀerential level for M (HH) & 1.5 TeV due to the signiﬁcant opening of phase space. In this regime, we also ﬁnd good agreement with the normalization and shape between the EWA and full MEs. At lower invariant masses, particularly for M(HH) . 500 GeV, we ﬁnd that the EWA overestimates the full ME in the same manner as observed in the previous section. In this regime, the EWA distributions increase more quickly with rising ME overestimates the full ME by about a factor of 3 − 5 at 3.4 −4.7 at 30 TeV. As longitudinal weak boson PDFs do not contain collinear logarithms, the enhancements in Fig. 3(a) are driven exclusively by soft logarithms. This implies that the EWA favors the production of relatively softer W nomenon that is sometimes [4] described as “ultra collinear enhancements.” Consequentially, increasing the collider energy reinforces the sensitivity to (M tions, which must be negative. Despite this, the distributions show that regardless of the EWA converges to the full ME computation for M(HH) & 1 TeV. acteristics. Foremost we ﬁnd that the full ME distribution consistently sits within the EVA scale uncertainty band for M(γγγ) & 750 GeV −1 TeV, for all for increasing boundary and towards the envelope’s center. For a ﬁxed M (γγγ), we ﬁnd that the thicknesses of the µ just outside MC statistical uncertainties. This is consistent with the ratio expression of Eq. (4.7), which does not obviously suggest an additional dependence on collider energy once M(γγγ) is ﬁxed. An important diﬀerence with respect to the M(HH) case is the preference for larger values of M (γγγ) with increasing invariant masses are preferred at increasing collider energy.) As W of possible ME-level enhancements from longitudinal polarizations, we attribute these behaviors to the collinear logarithm contained in the f invariant masses. Notably, the collinear logarithms reinforce the accuracy of the EVA by favoring phase space regions where (M As shown in Sec. 2 and App. A, EW boson PDFs can be constructed using either the virtuality q of V µ → V whether these schemes give appreciably diﬀerent results. To explore this, we focus on the process W γγγ at analogous process under the EWA. For the EWA curves, we consider the scale variation envelop spanned by setting µ curves) and evolution by p found in previous subsections, the distribution for the full ME sits in the EWA envelope for M(γγγ) & 750 GeV, when assuming evolution by q Turning to the M (γγγ) distribution in Fig. 3(b), we observe several of the same charl splitting. Given that the expressions for the fPDFs diﬀer, we investigate In Fig. 4(a), we show the invariant mass distribution of the (γγγ)-system in WW→√ s = 4 TeV using the full ME for the 2 → 5 scattering process (solid) and the Figure 4. (a) The invariant M(γγγ) distribution of the process W the full 2 → 5 ME (solid) and the EVA W evolution by virtuality q (dash) and µ but for |η envelope is systematically shifted upward to a larger set of rates. Notably, this leads to the This shift is entirely due to the diﬀerent arguments in the PDFs’ collinear logarithms. evolution by p a ﬁxed factorization scale, the logarithm in the evolution-by-p | < 1.5. (c) The same as (a) but for p> 150 GeV. ˆs/4 curve for evolution by pto overestimate the full ME when M (γγγ) & 2 TeV. More speciﬁcally, for evolution by q, one has f(ξ, µ) ∝ log(µ/M), whereas for by a factor of 1/(1 − ξ). This favors larger momentum fractions and therefore harder invariant mass distributions since M disagreement do not imply that evolution-by-p that setting µ and collider energy. Obviously, setting µ common practice SCET [83, 84], would recover the results for evolving by q we ﬁnd that two the envelopes converge, and diﬀerences between the two evolution schemes are within MC statistical uncertainties. Importantly, the full ME distribution remains inside both envelopes for M(γγγ) & 750 GeV. To understand this improved agreement, recall that when the hard scattering scale M(γγγ) is ﬁxed, one probes smaller momentum fractions for increasing collider energies. This implies that as enhancements cease and systematically approach unity, i.e., 1/(1 − ξ) → 1. ﬁnal-state system. In particular, we consider the cases when photons are (c) more central with |η cross section, a few qualitative observations are worth reporting. In ﬁgure (c), we observe a shift in the distribution to smaller M(γγγ), whereas in ﬁgure (d) the shift is to larger M(γγγ). In both cases, the change is kinematical. Consider the invariant mass of the entire three-photon system in terms of two-photon systems, i.e., Here, η leads to smaller diphoton masses, and hence smaller triphoton masses. Likewise, requiring larger p these diﬀerent shifts, we do not ﬁnd clear improvement or worsening of the agreement between either evolution scheme and the full ME. In both (c) and (d), the full ME distribution sits inside both envelopes for M(γγγ) & 750 GeV. However, as in the baseline case, the p-scheme again overestimates the full ME for M (γγγ) & 2 TeV due to too large log(1−ξ) enhancements. This suggests that the speciﬁc dynamics of the hard scattering process may not have an appreciable impact the validity of the EWA, as one would hope. As a ﬁnal check of our implementation of EW boson PDFs into mg5amc and as a proofof-concept demonstration of the potential capabilities, we brieﬂy explore matrix element matching (MEM) with transverse weak boson PDFs. The idea behind MEM is that one can divide computations for complicated, many-leg ﬁnal states that are susceptible to numerical instabilities, e.g., µ smaller ﬁnal-state multiplicity that represents a particular region of phase space of the original process, e.g., the process µ the collinear µ In Fig. 4(b), we show the invariant mass distribution but fors = 14 TeV. Remarkably, In Fig. 4(c) and (d), we investigate the impact of tighter phase space cuts on the | < 1.5, and (d) harder with p> 150 GeV. Aside from an obvious reduction in and φare the pseudorapidity and azimuth of γ. Requiring a smaller |η| window leads to larger diphoton masses, and therefore larger triphoton masses. Despite the phase space for (i) is excluded, e.g., µ phase space for the original ME, up to power corrections that are formally small. The aim of this procedure is to eﬃciently describe regions of phase space that are otherwise diﬃcult to model simultaneously due to instabilities associated with soft and/or collinear radiation. If MEM is successfully implemented, then the sum of (i) and (ii) should not only reproduce the original cross section, up to uncertainties, but also display an insensitivity to the (artiﬁcial) cutoﬀ scale that divides the original process into regions (i) or (ii). full ME, we focus on the scattering process e the cross section of the process (σ of µ (iii) a hard piece (σ Here, µ splittings. The second cutoﬀ Λ, which satisﬁes µ such that collinear factorization remains a good approximation. (The introduction of Λ is simply for bookkeeping: it ensures σ power corrections, which we neglect (retain) in the (quasi-)collinear expression: Combining the quasi-collinear and hard terms, one obtains the cross section (σ σ) for wide-angle µ terms are kept). Moreover, were one to combine the leading logarithmic term of σ σ, then the logarithmic dependence on µ recover the total cross section, up to the neglected power corrections. Explicitly, one ﬁnds This indicates that µ collinear and wide-angle regions of phase space in an inclusive calculation. νsplittings. In principle, summing the two components should recover the full To sketch MEM conceptually for the case of matching collinear W(or Z) PDFs with → Wνsplitting: (i) a collinear piece (σ), (ii) a quasi-collinear piece (σ), and  Mis a factorization scale separating collinear and wide-angle µ→ Wν is upper bound on pallowed by momentum conservation and phase space cuts. After integration over p, both σand σwill scale like a collinear logarithm and When mediated by the EWA, we can identify e collinear component of the inclusive e Eq. (4.15) as the wide-angle component of the inclusive e the appropriate phase space cut is applied to p with collinear e Sec. 4.2, we impose the following phase space restrictions on both Eqs. (4.14) and (4.15): We treat the initial-state W deﬁned in terms of (i) q that f by q norm of the µ This cut is implemented into mg5amc through the dummy_cuts function (ﬁle dummy_fct.f). For the case of evolution by p ﬁducial cross section for e (ﬂat black curve labeled “Total”); (ii) the same but with restrictions on the µ splitting (light purple curve labeled “Full ME + q cut” or “Full ME + p ﬁducial cross section with its scale uncertainty band for e band labeled “EWA”); and (iv) the sum of the restricted cross section and EWA with scale uncertainty (dark blue or red bands labeled “Sum”). More speciﬁcally, we show the dependence when µ 1 TeV (solid lines) and M(γγγ) > 3 TeV (dashed lines). For both M(γγγ) cuts we also show in the lower panel of each plot the ratio of the summed result, with its uncertainty band, to the total ﬁducial cross section without collinear restrictions. The f the restriction on µ bands are obtained from three-point variation of µ 1 TeV. As one can anticipate, the ﬁducial cross sections with and without restrictions on To demonstrate that MEM is possible with transverse weak boson PDFs, we focus on W→ γγγ in eµcollisions and deﬁne the following disjoint regions of phase space: To regulate poles associated with ﬁnal-state photons, to avoid instabilities associated has been evaluated at a factorization scale µ, then for the case of evolution , we remove collinear and shallow-angle splittings in Eq. (4.15) by requiring that the In Fig. 5, we show as a function of the factorization scale ats = 10 TeV: (i) the total To establish a baseline, we start with Fig. 5(a) for evolution by qat M(γγγ) > Figure 5. Matrix element matching in EVA for e p-scheme, at and p is placed on the momentum transfer variable |q µ, we observe a logarithmic-like dependence for both the full ME with a |q as the EWA result. In the former (latter), the rate decreases (increases) with increasing µ We observe that the restricted rate and the EWA rate are comparable over the approximate range µ a |q > 160 GeV, respectively. → Wsplittings converge to the same rate, about σ ∼ 0.3 fb, when eﬀectively no cut ∈ (200 GeV, 500 GeV). For µ& 1.5 TeV −2 TeV, we ﬁnd that the full ME with | cut becomes negligible, whereas the EWA result remains comparable to the total νγγγ cross section. Over the range of µ spans from about ±75% at µ however, that the large change to the uncertainty band reﬂects the extreme range of µ investigate. (Varying µ since f we ﬁnd that the sum reproduces the total ﬁducial cross section to within uncertainties and shows a strong insensitivity to the matching scale for µ was achieved. While not shown, we report that the central value for the summed result consistently overestimates the total result by about 3% − 7% for µ and up to 20%−30% for µ much of the same qualitative and quantitative behavior. The two notable diﬀerences are: (i) the obvious reduction in cross sections due to a more restrictive phase space cut, and (ii) a more stable summed result that features a central value (curve not shown) sitting nearly uniformly at about 10% above the total result for µ distinguish the total ﬁducial cross section without t-channel cuts (σ result (σ (This is clear from the fact that the summed rate exceeds the total rate.) Second is that the W µ. 1 TeV when with standard practices in pQCD, where µ one nearly always uses QCD PDFs that have been DGLAP-evolved; this has the eﬀect of reducing the size of PDFs due to the RG running of α large collinear logarithms. The EW PDFs throughout this work are not evolved with EW- ∼ log µ/M.) Importantly, when adding the restricted and EWA cross sections, Much can be learned from this exercise. First is that the power corrections (∆σ) that PDFs, and by extension the ZPDFs, work best when µis set to lower values, e.g.,√ DGLAP equations and necessitates smaller µ large values of µ doubt, this can be attributed to a breakdown of the collinear approximation, which requires collinear initial-state splittings, i.e., |q independence of the summed result on a matching scale indicates that the logarithmic dependence on µ This serves as a highly non-trivial check of MEM with W the potential to support it in MC event generators. Finally, we note that the very similar and consistent size of the scale uncertainty bands across all channels can be attributed to the fact that we are working with ﬁxed µ by the ratio σ(µ lution by p the summed result reproduces the total ﬁducial cross section to within uncertainties for µ . 1.5 TeV. For larger µ the uncertainty band of the summed result. We attribute this breakdown of MEM to a breakdown of the collinear approximation. The breakdown is more explicit in this case since one is varying p scattering process, we show in Figs. 5(c) and 5(d) the same quantities as in Figs. 5(a), but consider the more restrictive phase space cuts (c) |η| < 1.5 and (d) p observe many of the same qualitative features, indicating some degree of independence from the hard scattering process. (Fewer changes would suggest more universal-like behavior.) One notable diﬀerence is that the tighter η the summed and total results out to about µ observed for the tighter p for needs to be said. One noteworthy diﬀerence, however, is that higher collider energy further alleviates diﬀerences between the total and summed results, and extends the agreement to µ& 3 TeV. For all cases, the “summed” rate remains bigger than the “total” rate. A scenario in which the EVA promises to be highly relevant is that of a multi-TeV µ collider. It is worth reiterating that when considering a generic multi-particle state F, the VBF mechanism becomes an increasingly important, if not dominant, production vehicle in lepton collisions as the energy increases [41]. Given this, it is natural to consider muon colliders as eﬀective weak boson colliders and take full advantage of the EVA in order to systematically organize and simplify the precision of scattering computations. Focusing now on Fig. 5(b), we show the same quantities as in Fig. 5(a) but for evo- To further explore the dependence on the kinematics of the hard WW→ γγγ Finally in Fig. 6(a) and (b), we show the same quantities as in Fig. 5(a) and (b) but s = 30 TeV. As the qualitative and quantitative ﬁndings are highly comparable, little In this section, we explore the production of SM states generically parameterized by where F contains up to n All helicity polarizations are deﬁned in the hard-scattering frame, i.e., the rest frame of F. We consider collider conﬁgurations over the range particles to obey the following kinematic and ﬁducial cuts: The invariant mass cut of 1 TeV on the system F is needed to ensure that power corrections of the form (M moderate rapidities y to avoid t- and u-channel singularities and instabilities associated with ﬁnal-state particles, as advocated by Ref. [25]; in the massless limit, the pseudorapidity value of y → η = 3 corresponds to a polar angle of θ ≈ 5.7 or V and display three-point scale uncertainties. Scale uncertainties are unavailable for V scattering as the f and multi-Higgs production. In Sec. 5.2, top quark and associated top quark production are discussed, followed by diboson and triboson production in Secs. 5.3 and 5.4, respectively. In Fig. 7, we show as a function of collider energy [TeV] the ﬁducial cross section [fb], along with the associated three-point scale uncertainty band (from left to right in Eq. (5.3) corresponds the darkest to lightest color band), as mediated by (a) all initial-state EW boson polarizations, (b) longitudinal-longitudinal scattering, (c) transverse-longitudinal scattering, and (d) transverse-transverse scattering. and multi-Higgs production, with V H production rates being more than an order of magnitude larger than HH production. More speciﬁcally, the ZH and W σ ∼ 5 − 25 fb for over the same range. By C-symmetry, the W and therefore is not shown. The production of γH is universally smaller than ZH and W H by about a factor of 2 − 3. Since ZH and γH are both mediated by W the diﬀerence can be attributed to the diﬀerence in W W Z and W Wγ gauge couplings, where σ also driven by W pling), it is tempting to also attribute the relative size of the V H and HH production rates to the coupling ratio (g/λ) paragraph, this is not actually the case. All V H and HH channels are about 2-to-3 orders of magnitude larger than HHH production, which is yet another 2-to-3 orders of magnitude larger than HHHH production. The (relatively) tiny triple and quadruple Higgs cross Vscattering, we set the central collinear factorization scale according to Eq. (4.5) Our survey is organized in the following manner: We start in Sec. 5.1 with associated At the unpolarized level in Fig. 7(a), we observe a strong hierarchy between associated Figure 7. As a function of collider energy, the ﬁducial cross section and scale uncertainties under the EVA for associated Higgs and multi-Higgs production in µ state EW boson polarizations, (b) longitudinal-longitudinal scattering, (c) transverse-longitudinal scattering, and (d) transverse-transverse scattering. sections follow from the compound eﬀect of a small Higgs self-coupling and phase space suppression. For to threshold eﬀects; above this scale, the energy dependence becomes milder. For instance: The V H channels are driven almost exclusively by V leading component of V As a function of polarization, one sees from Figs. 7(b-d) several notable characteristics. production in µ EVA for polarization-summed and polarized initial states, at polarizations are deﬁned in the hard-scattering frame. Phase space cuts are summarized in Eq. (5.2). Also shown is the mg5amc syntax for modeling the process assuming the multi-particle deﬁnitions “vp=z,w+,a” and “vm=z,w-,a.” The conﬁguration (0, T ) implies a sum over both (0, T ) and (T, 0), and uses the syntax generate vp{0} vm{T} > ...; add process vp{T} vm{0} > ... for the smaller dependence on factorization scales when summing over all polarizations, but also contains a sub-leading V have comparable V Theorem. This indicates that the σ to the compound eﬀect of logarithmic enhancements in f allowed by angular momentum conservation, e.g., V We report that HHH production has signiﬁcant and comparable contributions from V and V receives comparable contributions from all polarization conﬁgurations. As one can expect, production from V For each unpolarized and polarized scattering conﬁguration, we document in Table 4 the Vscattering, but only a marginal contribution from VV. Interestingly, HHHH relevant mg5amc process syntax that enables our computation and the ﬁducial cross section [fb] with its scale uncertainty [%], for representative collider energies. Next, we address tt pair and associated tt production, focusing on the channels For the tttt process, we consider both the production though QCD and EW couplings (tttt Figure 8. Same as Fig. 7 but for tt pair production and tt + X associated production. the unpolarized and helicity-polarized cross sections as a function of collider energy in the same manner as in Fig. 7. An immediate observation is that for all processes each of the polarization combinations of initial-state EW bosons V contribution to the unpolarized process. This is in contrast to associated and multi-Higgs production in Sec. 5.1, where typically one particular V process. For all polarized and unpolarized cases, tt production exhibits the largest cross sections, whereas pure EW production of tttt exhibits the lowest rates. The diﬀerence between the channels is about three orders of magnitude. Mixed QCD+EW production of tttt sits just above the pure EW rate; notably, the diﬀerence between the two tttt processes is larger than their uncertainty bands. All ttV and ttH cross sections are sandwiched between the two processes and exhibit a rate hierarchy that is in line with naïve EW coupling enhancement/suppression. While the hierarchy is independent of collider energy, some reordering can be observed when individual helicity conﬁgurations are considered. have highly comparable rates. This is essentially due to all these channels being driven by Table 5. Same as Table 4 but for tt pair production and tt associated production. Focusing ﬁrst on VVscattering in Fig. 8(b), we ﬁnd that the ttV and ttH channels all either W ences in coupling constants. As there is no γ like there is in other polarization conﬁgurations. ﬁnd appreciably larger cross sections than for pure V this to the opening of γ Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the hierarchy of ttγ/Z/W conﬁguration of initial-state EW bosons. For example: ttZ has a larger rate than ttW larger rates than for ttγ, which is not the case for V We now turn to diboson production in EVA. In Fig. 9, we plot again the (a) polarizationsummed and (b-d) polarized production cross section with their respective factorization scale uncertainties, as a function of collider energy for the following six processes As in previous cases, there are several global features that one can infer. Foremost is that unlike Higgs (Fig. 7) and top quark (Fig. 8) processes, we ﬁnd a clear hierarchy among initial-state EW boson polarizations. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that V egorically the dominant production vehicle of EW boson pairs. The role of V is about one-to-two orders of magnitude smaller than V scattering is yet another decade smaller. As of V diboson cross sections in the EVA exhibit a relatively larger scale uncertainty than Higgs and top quark production, which feature a larger dependence on V ﬁducial cross sections shown in the unpolarized case largely mirrors the hierarchy in V scattering. That said, we ﬁnd that this same hierarchy is mostly preserved with other helicity conﬁgurations. This suggests a larger dependence on available partonic channels and gauge couplings than logarithmic enhancements from soft and collinear regions of phase space. For example: the W ﬁgurations but also can be produced via the most number of partonic conﬁgurations, i.e., production. These processes exhibit the lowest diboson cross sections but can only proceed through one or two partonic channels, namely W helicity suppression stemming from angular momentum conservation also plays a role in this hierarchy. For example: while W enhancement than W proceed through a high-wave (low-wave) angular momentum conﬁguration. Wor WZscattering. Hence, appreciable diﬀerences in rate are due to diﬀer- More explicitly, for VVscattering in Fig. 8(c) and VVscattering in Fig. 8(d), we scattering, but the opposite is true in VVscattering. Both conﬁgurations lead to We summarize these results for representatives in Table 5. Another consequence of the strong polarization dependence is that the hierarchy of W, ZZ, Zγ, and γγfusion. The reverse can be said for γγ and γW We summarize these results for representatives in Table 6. In the ﬁnal part of our survey, we show in Fig. 10 the ﬁducial cross sections for triboson production (a) after summing over all initial-state helicity polarizations and (b-d) for individual (λ An immediate observation we can make is the qualitative similarities between triboson and diboson production in Fig. 9. In particular, we ﬁnd that triboson production is driven by V→ ZWW, γWW, ZZZ, ZZW, γZW, and γγW largely V cess: The production of ZW σ(ZW ponent is about O(1 − 10 fb), and the V hand, for γγW with σ(γγW ponent is about O(10 O(90%) V hierarchy that one observes in V ordering inverts. We attribute this to the opening of orbital angular momentum conﬁgurations in 2 → 3 scattering, which can spoil the cancellations described in Sec. 5.3. While it Vscattering. The VVrate is an order of magnitude or two smaller, and the rate is smaller by about one or two additional decades. The precise polarization composition has a slight dependence on the underlying pro- W) ∼ O(10 −100 fb) fors ∼ 5 −30 TeV. Over this same range, the VVcom- Vscattering while γγWproduction is roughly O(99%) VVscattering. Other similarities between triboson and diboson production include the cross section scattering. One exception is γγWand γγγ production in VVscattering, where the is beyond our immediate scope, one can, in principle, investigate the hierarchy of triboson processes by considering the relative important of speciﬁc partonic and helicity channels, e.g., γ triboson system into its helicity components, thereby allowing one to investigate the relative importance of high- and low-wave angular momentum conﬁgurations. Finally, due to the similarities between diboson and triboson production, we conjecture that comparable behavior will be observed for the production for four or more EW vector bosons. γscattering or ZZscattering. One can also further decompose the ﬁnal-state We summarize these results for representatives in Table 7. As a weakly coupled, non-Abelian gauge theory, the weak sector of the SM naturally exhibits similarities to the electromagnetic and strong sectors, e.g., coupling universality. However, as the weak sector is also spontaneously broken, scattering and decay rates involving weak bosons feature a power-law dependence on the scale ratio (M 0. In the absence of such contributions, i.e., when momentum-transfer scales are much larger than the EW scale, meaning that O(M rates involving weak gauge bosons resemble the analogous expressions for massless gauge bosons in QED and pQCD. Importantly, this resemblance also holds for the factorization of weak-boson emission in the collinear and soft limits. particular how it diﬀers from QED and pQCD, is no longer an academic intrigue as multiTeV µ successors of the HL-LHC program [39, 40]. At these colliders, typical parton collisions readily satisfy known criteria for collinear factorization of weak bosons. Even at the Precisely how factorization (and resummation) operates in the weak sector, and in µcolliders and 100 TeV pp colliders are being seriously discussed as eventual 13 TeV LHC, such hard-scattering scales have already been observed in measurements of VBF/S. Therefore, establishing a fuller picture of the colliders’ physics potential requires a better understanding of how collinear and soft weak bosons behave in multi-TeV collisions. weak boson colliders” [41], we have revisited the treatment of weak bosons as perturbative constituents of high-energy leptons, the so-called Eﬀective W/Z Approximation [5, 6]. To conduct this investigation, we have implemented PDFs at LO for helicity-polarized γ, W and Z bosons from e allows for the fully diﬀerential simulation of scattering processes that are initiated by one or two initial-state EW bosons. Starting from a factorization theorem given in Eq. (2.2) (derived in App. A), we systematically explored the limitations of the EWA in Sec. 4. Novelties of our comparative investigation are the focus on: (i) universal and quasi-universal power-law corrections, (ii) universal and quasi-universal logarithmic corrections, (iii) phase space dependence, (iv) helicity polarization, and (v) many-body processes with VBF. Past studies were mostly restricted to 2 → 1 and 2 → 2 scattering processes, which possess special kinematics, at a single choice of factorization scale. We stress that some important issues, such as Z power corrections of the form (p These corrections originate in the derivation of weak boson PDFs and are related to the accuracy of collinear factorization and the Goldstone Equivalent Theorem. Our results suggest that using the EWA to describe VBF requires M 0.01. This is in addition to the typical assumptions needed to justify collinear factorization. When VBF systems carry larger invariant masses, we ﬁnd that the diﬀerence between the full computation and the EWA are within factorization scale uncertainties. As documented in and around Eq. (4.7), these uncertainties can be very large and demonstrate a need for RG evolution in order to achieve precise results with weak boson PDFs. We caution that we restricted our attention to dynamic factorization scales that are proportional to M for consistency across the many processes that we surveyed. As in pQCD, more “optimal” choices probably exist but are also (probably) process dependent and should be investigated thoroughly. Our implementation of EW boson PDFs in mg5amc can facilitate such studies. factorization scale ambiguities in multi-TeV µ W and Z masses. At ﬁrst, this may seem at odds with collinear factorization in pQCD, where above even a few GeV, PDFs can describe full matrix elements involving light quarks. However, using the operator product expansion, one can show that the phenomenon of “precocious scaling,” i.e., the emergence of asymptotic freedom at moderate energies, is due to the smallness of parton masses [101–103]. Power corrections associated with quark masses m reach at most O(m and reliable tools for O(m Motivated by the fact that multi-TeV µµcolliders are eﬀectively “high-luminosity As documented in Sec. 4.2, a key conclusion is that the EWA is acutely sensitivity to Importantly, we show that the size of non-universal power corrections and the size of verse weak boson PDFs: whereas longitudinal PDFs overestimate full scattering amplitudes, transverse PDFs underestimate them. As documented in Sec. 4.3, increasing the collider energy does not necessarily improve the accuracy of the EWA for M Whereas the presence of soft logarithms slightly improve the accuracy of transverse PDFs when is clear that a matching, subtraction, or re-weighting scheme akin to those already available for pQCD and QED is needed to correct EWA matrix elements in this region. To facilitate such developments, we also report the availability in mg5amc of both q PDFs for transversely polarized EW bosons. As shown in Sec. 4.4, p consistently lead to larger cross sections in EWA, but converge to the q when principle demonstration in Sec. 4.5 of matrix-element matching of W matrix elements. Despite its formally large scale uncertainty band, the matched result shows signiﬁcant independence on the matching scale. Broadly speaking, these capabilities provide a starting point for matching EWA matrix elements to EW parton showers and more sophisticated EW boson PDFs that involve RG evolution. where F contains up to n comparing polarized and polarization-summed cross sections, we ﬁnd an intriguing interplay between helicity polarizations and hard scattering processes. For example: whereas multiboson and many-boson production is driven by the scattering of initial-states in the large (0, T ) and (T, 0) component. In further contrast, multi-Higgs processes are dominated by (T, T ) and (0, 0) helicity conﬁgurations but receive only a marginal contribution from mixed conﬁgurations. It is worth noting that scale uncertainties at about δσ/σ ∼ 20% − 50% for many processes, which is beyond expectations based on coupling order. As we remained inclusive with respect to the helicities of ﬁnal-state particles, the processes we surveyed and their diﬀerential behavior can all be further investigated. 6.1 Recommendations for using W/Z PDFs in high-energy lepton collisions Finally, while much about PDFs for polarized and unpolarized weak bosons remains to be investigated, we believe this work helps clarify quantitatively when the W and Z bosons can be treated as partonic constituents of high-energy leptons. To further this prerogative, we provide a set of recommendations on using weak boson PDFs in many-TeV scattering calculations. These guidelines draw heavily from the ﬁndings in Sec. 4, are supported by analytic derivations of weak boson PDFs in App. A, and are applied to our survey in Sec. 5. For details on the usage of EW boson PDFs in mg5amc, see App. B.1. /M) . 0.01 for the EWA to adequately describe full matrix elements. For M. O(1 TeV), we ﬁnd contrasting behaviors between longitudinal and transs is increased, these same logarithms worsen the accuracy for longitudinal PDFs. It s increases. To further strengthen the parallels with pQCD, we give a proof-of- Given these considerations, we cataloged in Sec. 5 a litany of processes of the form , λ) = (T, T ) conﬁguration, top quark and associated top quark production features a • To minimize corrections associated with gauge bosons at x → 1, restrict the use of • While not discussed in detail, we ﬁnd notably improved numerical stability for com- The authors are grateful to Carlos Alishaan-Harz, Federico De Lillo, Tao Han, Aleksander Kusina, Fred Olness, Yang Ma, Luca Mantani, Keping Xie, and Xiaoran Zhao for enlightening discussions. received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme as part of the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Innovative Training Network MCnetITN3 (grant agreement no. 722104) and from FRS-FNRS agency via the IISN maxlhc convention (4.4503.16). FM also received funding from FNRS “Excellence of Science” EOS be.h Project No. 30820817. RR acknowledges the support of Narodowe Centrum Nauki under Grant No. 2019/34/E/ST2/00186, and the contribution of the VBSCan COST Action CA16108. Computational resources were provided by the supercomputing facilities of the Université catholique de Louvain (CISM/UCL) and the Consortium des Équipements de Calcul Intensif en Fédération Wallonie Bruxelles (CÉCI) funded by the Fond de la Recherche Scientiﬁque de Belgique (FRS-FNRS) under convention 2.5020.11 and by the Walloon Region. For completeness, we derive (polarized) W/Z PDFs as implemented in the MC event generator mg5amc. In making this work explicit, we avoid ambiguities in deﬁnitions of PDF that sometimes appear in the literature. Such diﬀerences are due to equally reasonable choices of, e.g., evolution variables, but can lead to sizable numerical diﬀerences at LO. ventions in App. A.1, MEs for polarized collinear splitting functions are derived in App. A.2, with the corresponding phase space decomposition/factorization given in App. A.3. Transverse momentum dependent distribution functions are then derived in App. A.4, and ﬁnally the collinear PDFs are given in App. A.5. While the construction follow closely that of Ref. [74], the identiﬁcation of a factorization scale µ closely aligned with Ref. [7]. This make more manifest that the procedure for MEM (see Sec. 4.5 and (potential) RG evolution is similar to those procedures in pQCD. the accuracy of the Goldstone Equivalence Theorem, require that M> O(1) TeV. the accuracy of collinear factorization, require that µ< O(1) TeV. p-evolved PDFs tos & O(10 TeV), or choose small µfors . O(10 TeV). putations throughout Sec. 5 when evaluating matrix elements in the Feynman gauge. AC received funding from FRS-FNRS agency (grant no. T.04142.18). FM and OM The construction proceeds in the following manner: after establishing notation and con- To derive polarized, weak boson splitting functions and PDFs, we work at the helicity amplitude level, in the so-called HELAS basis [93]. We assume the spacetime metric signature For a fermion with mass m = The two-component helicity eigenstates with respect to the 3-momentum direction ˆp are RH/LH helicities are normalized such that λ = +1/ − 1. Given this, the four-component helicity spinors for fermions (u) and antifermions (v) are: In the high energy limit, where (m/E)  1, the Dirac spinors simplify to Immediately one sees that the projection operators satisfy the identities = diag(+, −, −, −), and work in the unitary gauge at dimension d = 4. u(p, λ) =pand v(p, λ) =p. (A.5) In the Cartesian representation, its polarization vectors are given by In the last line we used the Lorentz factor γ = E this representation, the above polarization vectors satisfy the orthogonality relationships: Using the above, we can build the polarization vectors in the polar representation. For the RH (λ = +1), LH (λ = −1), and longitudinal (λ = 0) polarizations, these are given by For λ = ±1, the orthogonality relationships are modiﬁed such that Explicit computation shows that the auxiliary vector ˜ε obeys the following inner products: ε(q, x) =|~q|q(0, qq, qq, −q) = (0, cos¯θ cos¯φ, cos¯θ sin¯φ, − sin¯θ), (A.12) ε(q, y) =q(0, −q, q¯φ, cos¯ ε(q, z) =M|~q|, q, q, q= γ(β, sin¯θ cos¯φ, sin¯θ sin¯φ, cos¯θ). (A.14) qε(q, λ) = 0 and ε(q, λ)ε(q, λ) = −δ ε(q, λ = ±1) =1√(−λε(q, x) − iε ε(q, λ = 0) = ε qε(q, λ)ε(q, λ) = δand ε(q, λ)ε(q, λ) = −δ In the EVA it is useful [5] to rewrite the λ = 0 vector in the following exact form: The purpose of this decomposition is two-fold: The ﬁrst is to make manifest that the Goldstone contribution, i.e., the term that scales as ε contracted with external parton currents via the Dirac equation. Ultimately, this is due to SU(2) participate in helicity-inverting couplings of longitudinally weak boson. The second purpose is to make manifest that the non-vanishing part of ε beyond-twist-two term that scales as ε transverse polarization vectors but do not possess a longitudinal polarization vector. A.2 Polarized Collinear Splitting Functions for Massive Vector Bosons To build collinear splitting functions for weak bosons from high-energy leptons, we consider the deeply inelastic scattering (DIS) process shown in Fig, 11, given by The process above describes f(p and an internal weak boson V with mass M to the composition of B. In App. A.5, we will extend our result and present a factorization theorem involving a PDF for each beam. As we are only working at LO in the EW theory, we automatically work in the Single Boson Exchange Approximation. However, throughout this analysis, we neglect the contribution from interfering, Compton-like diagrams. Such contributions are sub-leading [7] in a Libby-Sterman sense [104, 105]. Here M scale Q = is denoted by ∆ Figure 11. Diagrammatic representation of f(p, λ) → V (q, λ)f(p, λ) splitting. current conservation of massless leptons, meaning that massless leptons do not For the process in Eq. (A.25), the associated ME is given by (VB → X) describes the VB → X hard scattering process that occurs at thepp with LH (RH) coupling g current can be written generically as (see Table 1 in Sec. 2.2 for explicit expressions) the conﬁnes of the SM’s SU(2) It does not account for the fact that quarks and leptons in the SM both reside in the SU(3) tions for EW splitting functions themselves, it does impact d.o.f. counting and cancellations at the level of cross sections. More precisely, for the f process, the V − f − f conservation. In equation (A.27), this causes the modiﬁcation where the indices I and J denote the colors of f and f 1, . . . , N decomposed into a sum over the outer product of polarization states with helicity λ The idea here is that if V , which possesses an invariant lifetime τ if the hard scattering scale is suﬃciently large such that Q  Γ that it can be well approximated as an asymptotic state. V ’s helicity λ during propagation: one would expect that helicity-inverting contributions scale as some positive power of (M as unphysical / auxiliary polarizations contribute proportionally to (q vanish under the on-shell condition. As a result, the Lorentz structure of the propagator over λ which translates to a squared ME of Naïvely, this suggests a double summation over the helicities of V . However, when one is totally inclusive over the ﬁnal-state X, then by unitarity 1 = An important caveat to this expression is that it assumes we are working solely within ⊗SU(2)product group. While working in this larger structure has trivial implica- = 3. For quarks, δ= N, whereas I, J = 1 and δ= 1 for leptons. Working in the limit were Vis nearly on-shell, the propagator’s numerator can be (q) reduces to a coherent sum over physical polarizations λ. This to say, a summation at the squared ME level. In terms of current algebra, this decomposition is equivalent to writing the ME as −iM= hXf|fBi = hX|hf|i|VihV| that the squared ME is only non-vanishing when the polarization of V in f → f same as the polarization for V in V The unitarity of ﬁnal-state X acts as an eﬀective Kronecker δ-function δ the double summation over helicities into a single summation over helicities, resulting in larizations vectors with the f amplitude, respectively, one obtains the pair of MEs: For ﬁxed polarizations of external particles f, f can be factorized into two spin-correlated sub-amplitudes: Immediately, one can write at the squared ME level: This indicates that if V goes on-shell and its mass is small compared to the scattering scale, then the probability density for f exchange of V and V To enact the on-shell condition such that Eqs. (A.37) and (A.38) are valid, we work in the kinematic conﬁguration where V and f i.e., the collinear limit. Formally, this involves working to leading order in the parameter λ ≡ p energy of f(p Returning to our derivation, after enjoining the outgoing (ε) and incoming (ε) po- |M|≈|M(f→ fV)||M(VB → X)|.(A.38) B → X probability densities. /E 1, where ~pis the transverse momentum 2-vector of f(p) and Eis the scattering frame, we can parameterize the momenta of the process in Eq. (A.25) by For the momenta above, occurs. While explicit computation of individual invariant masses leads to truncating wide-angle contributions at O(λ Intuitively, this indicates that external particles are massless or approximately massless (to O(λ smaller than the incoming energy E the energy fraction z is far from its boundaries at z = 0 (the high-energy regime) and z = 1 (the threshold regime), which would otherwise necessitate resummation. Eq. (A.27)) involving a vector emission are those that conserve helicity, namely Employing the transverse polarization vector in Eq. (A.17) for V helicity amplitude (M) for the f ≡(1 − z)E, |~p|sin θcos φ, |~p|sin θsin φ, (1 − z)E−p2(1 − z)E, (A.39c) = p− p=zE, − ~p, zE+p2(1 − z)E(A.39d) ≡ (zE, |~q|sin θcos φ, |~q|sin θsin φ, |~q|cos θ p≈ −p(1 − z), |~p|≈ (1 − z)E,sinθ≈(1 − z)z )). The internal V , on the other hand, carries a virtuality−q∼ pmuch ∼−q Emust consistently hold. Implicitly, we also work in the domain where As f, fare massless, the only non-zero f(p) → f(p) currents (as deﬁned in (λ= L, λ= L) = −i2˜ggEEcosθ2, esinθ2, −iesinθ2, cosθ2, (A.42) Table 8. The squared helicity amplitude for the f each non-vanishing helicity permutation, and assuming the coupling normalization of table 1. In the second line of the above, we evaluated the ME exactly. In the third, we expanded the angular dependence to lowest order in the opening angles, and in the ﬁnal line substituted θfor p Note that the Dirac equation for massless particles implies the following orthogonality: Employing this and the longitudinal polarization vector in Eq. (A.20) for V helicity amplitude for the f Importantly, the amplitudes for a transversely polarized V exhibit a dependence on p whereas the dependence is on M throughout the literature, this distinction leads to qualitative diﬀerences in scale evolution for λ one can interpret the forward emission of V . Repeating the same steps for the f→ fVsplitting process, we obtain (p, p) ·(p−p)= (−i˜g)u(p, λ)(6p− 6p)gP+ gPu(p, λ)= 0. (A.52) = ± and λ= 0 states. Moreover, as M(f→ fV) vanishes as (M/E) → 0, Explicit computation reveals that the relative minus sign in the transverse polarization cases can be traced to the relative phase diﬀerence that deﬁnes the λ (This is also evident by the relative positive sign in the longitudinal case.) At the level of squared MEs (|M| discussed under Eq. (A.27), the helicity amplitudes here neglect the complication of f, f carrying color. We now account for this by nothing that at the squared-ME level, the δ in Eq. (A.28) is squared and for quarks (leptons) sums to SU(2) For the f(p system, the phase space volume of the (n the one-body phase space for f phase space for the hard B + V → X sub-process and remain inclusive with respect to the kinematics of f momentum of X over its n dP S In the last line, we exploited the limits of Eq. (A.40), which allows the one-body phase space for f By parity inversion, the helicity amplitudes for the RH f→ fcurrents are: A.4 Transverse Momentum-Dependent Distribution Functions for EW Bosons To build a set of splitting functions that can be used with both spin-averaged and helicitypolarized MEs, we follow the formalism of Ref. [70] and consider the f + B → f scattering process when the external states f and f λbut all other external states are unpolarized. (This implies that helicities are averaged and summed for B and X.) We work in the rest frame of X, which one can eventually identify as the hard-scattering frame. In the collinear approximation, this frame is related to the beam c.m. frame by a boost along the z axis. For massless objects, which travel on the light cone, such longitudinal boosts cannot change the helicity; for massive objects, e.g., EW bosons V , helicity inversions are suppressed by factors of (M thereof, and are strongly suppressed in our kinematic limit. Using the results of App. A.3, the semi-polarized, 2 → n where the color-averaged but helicity-dependent, totally diﬀerential cross section is possible multiplicities of X. N the collinear limit, ﬁxing the polarization of V to be λ ME of Eq. (A.38), we rewrite the helicity-dependent, diﬀerential cross section as dP S kinematic limit in which we are working, the invariant masses of the (V B)-system (Q) and (fB)-system are related by Q is the Källen function deﬁned just below Eq. (2.5). Second is that f → f color-singlet process and that we are free to introduce color-averaging factors of 1/N In this expression, the summation runs over all extraneous dof, including color and In reaching the second line we exploited several observations. First is that in the for the V + B → X sub-process. This also implies that the squared amplitude for f → f passes through the summation after color indices have been counted (see Eq. (A.63)), i.e., Consequentially, we can consistently deﬁne the color-averaged but spin-dependent, total and diﬀerential cross sections for the (partonic) V + B → X sub-process at Q i.e., Eq. (A.69), when mediated in the collinear limit by a suﬃciently long-lived V In Eqs. (A.77) and (A.78) we extracted all ME factors associated with the polarized f virtuality-dependent parton density function (VD PDF) and analogously the polarized, transverse momentum-dependent PDF (TMD PDF) kinematically proceed, the lower boundary of the energy fraction integral is simply Importantly, in Eqs. (A.77) and (A.78), the positive-deﬁnite cutoﬀ scale µ introduced by hand to regulate the ultraviolet limit of the virtuality and transverse momentum integrals. Intuitively, µ Immediately, this allows us to express the total cross section for the full f +B → f+X, dzdqF(z, q) × ˆσV+ B → f+ X dzdpH(z, p) × ˆσV+ B → f+ X splitting process and any dependence on the azimuth angle to deﬁne the polarized, Noting that V must carry a minimum amount of energy V + B → X sub-process to which |q the same way, |q stipulating that µ PDFs in pQCD. However, it must be stressed that in pQCD, PDFs are typically RG-evolved with the DGLAP evolution equations. This impacts the interpretation and scaling of µ Taking the squared MEs for f integral, we report in Eqs. (2.6) and (2.7) respectively, the full expressions for the q (f) and the p the collinear limit. These expressions allow us to express the total cross section for the full f + B → f In these expressions, we have made explicit the power and logarithmic corrections that parameterize the uncertainty of collinear factorization of weak bosons in scattering computations. The ﬁrst correction is associated with how collinear V axis (or f in Eqs. (A.47), (A.51), and (A.56). The second correction is associated with the accuracy of the Goldstone Equivalent Theorem and originate from expanding the f plitude as seen exclusively in Eq. (A.56). The third correction is associated with the µ dependence introduced to regulate the evolution integrals in Eqs. (A.77) and (A.78). high-energy V |, p< µcorrespond to kinematics that justify a collinear expansion of ME; in f+ B → f+ X For the high-energy process µµ→ F + X, where the production of F is mediated by to extend the above results and write the factorization theorem The simulation of polarized and unpolarized EW PDFs in high-energy charged lepton collisions, i.e., EVA, is possible using a series of commands inside the mg5amc interface. Instruction on how to run/setup MadGraph5_aMC@NLO for various conﬁgurations involving unpolarized matrix elements can be found in Ref. [90]; for the setup of polarized matrix elements, see Ref. [70]. In this appendix, we describe how to setup a EVA computation in mg5amc and particularly focus the new options and syntax introduced for this mode. collisions. A typical set of mg5amc commands to simulate a process like this is set group_subprocesses False generate w+ w- > h h output DIRECTORY_OUTPUT launch DIRECTORY_OUTPUT The command “set group_subprocesses False” is currently mandatory and deactivates some internal optimization mechanisms that are not (yet) compatible with EW boson PDFs as implemented into mg5amc. The second command corresponds to the hard process, and operates at the level of initial-state weak bosons. (In this sense, EW bosons are treated as partons of e theory, without Z a nontrivial impact on numerical results [4, 25, 50, 75–78]. The “output” command deﬁnes the directory where the code containing MEs and phase space integration routines, i.e., MadEvent [92], are physically written on disk. The “launch” command activates an interface to conﬁgure, compile, and execute this code. As mg5amc works by numerically evaluating helicity amplitudes, the command above syntax is equivalent [70] to the syntax set group_subprocesses False add process w+{+} w-{-} > h h add process w+{+} w-{0} > h h As a concrete example, we consider the hard scattering process WW→ hh in µµ PDFs for polarized EW gauge bosons (EVA) from high-energy leptons. See text for further details. add process w+{-} w-{+} > h h add process w+{-} w-{-} > h h add process w+{-} w-{0} > h h add process w+{0} w-{+} > h h add process w+{0} w-{-} > h h add process w+{0} w-{0} > h h output DIRECTORY_OUTPUT In both cases, the particle species W is prompted with the ability to edit multiple conﬁguration ﬁles. To run in EVA mode, a user will need to edit the ﬁle DIRECTORY_OUTPUT/Cards/run_card.dat. This ﬁle contains all conﬁguration details related to the beam, factorization scales, phase space restrictions (cuts), etc. The list of the important and new parameters are summarized in Table 9, and are described below. It is important to stress that in our implementation of EVA, initial- and ﬁnal-state W and Z bosons retain their masses in all helicity amplitudes; nowhere do we set can be employed in conjunction with EVA computations. This allows one to study, for example, the full process, W FeynRules Object (UFO) libraries [109]. We caution, however, that EW boson PDFs are hard-coded into ﬁles ElectroweakFlux.f and ElectroweakFluxDriver.f in the directory LO/Source/PDF/. This means that modiﬁcations to the ` −` −γ/Z and ` −ν −W vertices introduced by a UFO will not propagate into the PDFs. We have designed and organized the calling of EW boson PDFs in mg5amc such that the W and Z boson masses as well as the EW couplings are automatically set to those values listed in the conﬁguration ﬁle DIRECTORY_OUTPUT/Cards/param_card.dat. The values of the electron and muon masses When the user interface is initiated, i.e., just after the “launch” command, the user , M= 0 GeV. As a consequence, other mg5amc modules, such as MadSpin [107, 108], Investigating new physics remains possible through the interface [91] to Universal are not read from the param_card.dat. Instead, the values listed in Eq. (3.3) are hard-coded into the ﬁle DIRECTORY_OUTPUT/Source/PDF/ElectroweakFlux.inc. must be set in the ﬁle run_card.dat is the PDF set. Choosing EW boson PDFs for both beams can be done via the “pdlabel” parameter, which now accepts three additional modes: “eva” for the EW boson PDFs described in Sec. 2; “iww” for the so-called Improved Weizsäcker-Williams (IWW) γ PDF of Ref. [106]; and “mixed” for enabling diﬀerent PDF conﬁgurations for beams 1 and 2. A fourth option “none” deactivates PDFs for both beams. The γ PDF described in Sec. 2 is known historically as the Weizsäcker-Williams approximation [16, 17, 74], and is analogous to the gluon PDF in QCD at LO. Setting “pdlabel=iww” calls the γ PDF derived using the IWW approximation [106]; this PDF is sometimes mislabeled in the literature. Simply put, the IWW γ PDF augments the original Weizsäcker-Williams γ PDF by terms that correspond to operators in the operator product expansion with a twist larger than 2, i.e., are relatively suppressed by powers of (m Just like for partons in hadron PDFs, the appropriate PDF and ME are paired automatically by the routines of pdg2pdf.f and pdg2pdf_lhapdf6.f in the directory LO/Source/PDF/. To make these options clearer, we have updated instructions within run_card.dat to read: #********************************************************************* #********************************************************************* either the virtuality carried by the incoming EW boson or the transverse momentum carried away by the outgoing lepton in ` → V ` numerical diﬀerences (see Sec. 4.4). In mg5amc, both have been implemented and can be selected using the run_card.dat parameter “ievo_eva.” If this parameter is set to “0” (default), q diﬀerent PDF conﬁguration for each beam. This development makes it possible to call both EW boson PDFs and QCD parton PDFs for processes such as W µp collisions. To enable this, a user must set “pdlabel=mixed” and conﬁgure two new run_card.dat parameters “pdlabel1” and “pdlabel2.” These two parameters operate in the same manner as “pdlabel” but are limited to only one beam. We stress that it is up to the user to ensure that “pdlabel1” and “pdlabel2” align with the parameters “lpp1” and “lpp2,” as well as align with the 1 2 > 3 4 ... ordering of “generate” command above. der development. Therefore, for the EVA to work in mg5amc, one must stipulate which types of beams are colliding. In run_card.dat, this is speciﬁed via the parameters “lpp1” for beam 1 “lpp2” for beam 2. The allowed values of these parameters retain the same In order to initiate a computation with the EVA, the most important parameter that As described in Sec. 2, it is possible to derive EW boson PDFs that are functions of For asymmetric process, it is also possible, for the ﬁrst time in mg5amc, to employ a Presently, the EVA is only enabled for eand µbeams; other capabilities are unmeaning as in previous versions of mg5amc. Explicitly, setting “lppX=0” corresponds to no PDF for beam X, where X is 1 or 2. Likewise, “lppX=+1(-1)” corresponds to a PDF for a proton (antiproton), and “lppX=+2(-2)” calls the Equivalent Photon Approximation (antiproton). Setting “lppX=+3(-3)” means employing a PDF for an electron (positron) beam, and “lppX=+4(-4)” means a PDF for a muon (antimuon) beam. Presently, setting “pdlabel=eva” or “pdlabelX=eva” requires setting “lppX=±3” or “lppX=±4.” (The same is true for setting “pdlabel=iww” or “pdlabelX=iww.”) To make these options clearer, we have updated the relevant instructions within run_card.dat to now read: #********************************************************************* # lpp: 0=No PDF, 1=proton, -1=antiproton, 2=elastic photon of proton,* #********************************************************************* and “lpp2=+4,” as well as mixed-ﬂavor lepton beams, e.g., “lpp1=-3” and “lpp2=+4.” At this point, we reminder potential users that due to electric and weak isospin charge assignments, polarized weak boson PDFs are not charge symmetric, e.g., f Likewise, the EW boson PDF implemented here are only LO accurate. This means that the W lepton and lepton-hadron collisions in the absence of lepton PDFs, i.e., “lppX=0” [90]. We have extended this capability and it is now also possible to polarize electron and muon beams when “lppX=±3,±4” and “pdlabel=eva” or “pdlabelX=eva.” This is done via the run_card.dat parameters “polbeam1” and “polbeam2.” A value of “polbeamX=0” (default) corresponds to an unpolarized beam, while “-100” and “+100” indicate, respectively, that 100% of beam X is polarized in the LH and RH helicity state. polarization of an EW boson cannot be changed at run time via run_card.dat. It can only be speciﬁed when executing the “generate” command; see Ref. [70] for details. describes a polarized EW boson V Here, −1 ≤ β beam. For β γ PDF of Ref. [111], which describes the elastic emission of a photon from a proton It is possible to use the EVA in mg5amc with same-sign lepton beams, e.g., “lpp1=+4” content of `is zero since such splittings ﬁrst appear ﬁrst at O(αα). Presently, it is possible in mg5amc to polarize electron and muon beams in lepton- To implement beam polarization with the EVA, we have augmented Eq. (2.8), which f(ξ, µ) = (β+1 − β2) × f(ξ, µ) +(1 − β)2× f(ξ, µ Likewise, setting β LH (RH) helicity state corresponds to setting “polbeamX=-100 (100).” be either dynamical, i.e., determined on an event-by-event basis, or ﬁxed. This is chosen in run_card.dat via the Boolean parameter “fixed_fac_scale.” Setting this parameter to “true (false)” activates a ﬁxed (dynamical) µ cal/static scale scheme can be set separately for each beam using the two Boolean parameters “fixed_fac_scale1” and “fixed_fac_scale2.” If a static µ is set in units of GeV by the parameters “dsqrt_q2fact1” and “dsqrt_q2fact2.” For dynamical choices of µ the parameter “dynamical_scale_choice.” For details on this, see Ref. [90]. It is possible to rescale µ EW boson PDFs is possible using the “systematics” feature and setting “use_syst=True.” Users are reminded that W/Z boson PDFs are not deﬁned for values of µ To reproduce the cross sections for the process V following syntax to generate our (polarized) matrix elements and work environments: set group_subprocesses false set gauge Feynman define vap = w+ z a define vam = w- z a define vxp = w+ z define vxm = w- z generate vap vam > h h output vxvx_hh generate vap{T} vam{T} > h h output vtvt_hh add process vxp{0} vam{T} > h h output vtv0_hh generate vxp{0} vxm{0} > h h output v0v0_hh obtained in accordance to the setup in Sec. 5 through the following run time commands The collinear factorization scale µthat enters into EW boson PDFs in the EVA can Fiducial cross sections, scale uncertainties, and events ats = 3 TeV can then be Table 10. For the process W [fb] as reported by Ref. [25] (σ statistical pull (∆σ/δσ (right). The mg5amc statistical uncertainty corresponds to 400k events, or δσ launch vxvx_hh set width all 0 set lpp1 -4 set lpp2 4 set pdlabel eva set fixed_fac_scale false set dynamical_scale_choice 4 # muf = scalefact * dsqrt(shat) set scalefact 0.5 set ievo_eva 0 # (0=q^2 or 1=pT^2) set ebeam 1500 set no_parton_cut set nevents 1k set dsqrt_shat 1000 set pt_min_pdg {25:50} set eta_max_pdg {25:3} set use_syst true set nhel 1 The new and important commands for using the EVA in mg5amc are documented in App. B and summarized in Table 9. As one high-level check (of several) of our implementation of the EVA, we consider the process W this process for various polarization conﬁgurations, we use the mg5amc syntax set group_subprocesses false set gauge Feynman generate w+ w- > t t~ QED=2 QCD=0 output wxwx_tt_XLO W, and (bottom row) WWscattering, ats = 10 TeV (left), 14 TeV(center), and 30 TeV generate w+{0} w-{0} > t t~ QED=2 QCD=0 output w0w0_tt_XLO generate w+{0} w-{T} > t t~ QED=2 QCD=0 add process w+{T} w-{0} > t t~ QED=2 QCD=0 output w0wT_tt_XLO generate w+{T} w-{T} > t t~ QED=2 QCD=0 output wTwT_tt_XLO The commands above correspond to (i) unpolarized W tering, (iii) W to have a nonzero polar angle in the hard-scattering frame. Speciﬁcally, they require Here p momentum in the same frame, and m ment this cut by adding the following lines in their appropriate locations to the dummy_cuts function in the auxiliary ﬁle DIRECTORY_OUTPUT/SubProcesses/dummy_fct.f: integer ff double precision mtop2,sHat,rat,cosTh double precision SumDot external SumDot mtop2 = (173.0d0)**2 sHat = SumDot(p(0,1), p(0,2), 1d0) rat = 1.d0 - mtop2 / sHat do ff=nincoming+1,nexternal enddo launch wxwx_tt_XLO To avoid potential instabilities, the authors of Ref. [25] require ﬁnal-state top quarks is the z momentum of the (anti)top quark in the hard frame, ~p is its threecosTh = p(3,ff) / dsqrt(p(1,ff)**2 + p(2,ff)**2 + p(3,ff)**2) if(cosTh.gt.rat) then dummy_cuts=.false. return endif To steer phase space integration, we use the following commands ats = 10 TeV: set no_parton_cut set ebeam 5000 set nevents 40k set lpp1 -4 # setup beam1 as anti-muon set pdlabel eva set fixed_fac_scale1 false set fixed_fac_scale2 false set dynamical_scale_choice 4 # muf = scalefact * dsqrt(shat) set scalefact 0.5 set ievo_eva 0 # (0=q^2 or 1=pT^2) set use_syst true done We make the necessary modiﬁcation to this script for by σ pull, deﬁned by ∆σ/δσ row) unpolarized W scattering for T = ±, and (bottom row) W channel integration routines, a precise determination of our MC statistical uncertainty is complicated. Therefore, as a conservative estimate of our statistical uncertainty for 400k events, we take δσ negative, meaning σ to −0.01%. This translates to a statistical pull ranging from ∆σ/δσ We report in Table 10 the EVA-level cross section [fb] as reported by Ref. [25], denoted , the cross section computed with mg5amc, denoted by σ, and the statistical√