Today’s research in recommender systems is largely based on experimental designs that are static in a sense that they do not consider potential longitudinal eﬀects of providing recommendations to users. In reality, however, various important and interesting phenomena only emerge or become visible over time, e.g., when a recommender system continuously reinforces the popularity of already successful artists on a music streaming site or when recommendations that aim at p roﬁt maximization lead to a loss of consumer trust in the long run. In this paper, we discuss how AgentBased Modeling and Simulation (ABM) techniques can be u sed to study such impo rtant longitu dinal dynamics of recommender systems. To that purpose, we provide an overview of the ABM principles, outline a simulation framework for recommender systems based on the literature, and discuss various pr actical research questions t hat can be addressed with such an ABM-based simulation framework. Feedback Loops, Diversity and Homogenization, Longitu dinal Dynamics, Agent-Based Modeling Recommender systems can exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence on how users navigate informat io n spaces and make decisions. In parallel, these changes in user b ehavior impact other stakeholders as well, such as the providers of recommendation ser vices who, for example, seek to obtain higher customer retention rates or more sales through the recommendations [1, 17]. In practice, providers of recommendation services monitor the eﬀects of the intro duction or modiﬁcation of a recommender system over an extended period of time, often w ithin A/B tests (i.e., ﬁeld experiments), because only longer observation periods may lead to reliable insights regarding the sustainability of the desired eﬀects. However, ﬁ eld experiments have their limitations; e.g., in real-world experimental settings it may be diﬃcult (or even impossible) to control for the eﬀects of various confounding factors, such as users’ self-selected consumption strategies [32]. In academia, where access to major deployed systems is often not available, variou s proxies for assessing the eﬀects of diﬀerent recommendation algorithms or system-user interfaces can be used. The predominant research method is oﬄine experiments, where we use datasets containing user preference information, withhold some of the data, and then rely on variou s computational metrics, e.g., to assess the p rediction p erformance of an algorithm or its capability to generate diversiﬁed recommendations. Such analyses are without doubt useful to comp are algorithms in certain respects. However, a major limitation is that in experiments of this type we can only generate and evaluate recommendations for each user based on a static set of d ata. As such, these experiments do not allow us to investigate the po tentially undesired longitudinal eﬀects of personalized recommendations in pract ice. An example of such an eﬀect is when a recommender systems reinforces the popularity of already popular items over time, ultimately l eading to decreased sales diversity [18–20]. Controlled studies with users are an alternative to oﬄine experiments. Such studies commonly focus on user perceptions of the quality of system-generated recommendations, see, e.g., [9]. Again, however, user studies typically consist of a relatively short (often one-time) interaction of the participants wit h the system. While sometimes participants are queried about their intention to use the system in the future [26], longitudinal eﬀects are typically not examined. Regardless of the applied methodology, most research today focuses on evaluating recommender systems from the consumer side, e.g., in terms of reduced search eﬀort or the p robability of discovering new items. In reality, however, besides consumers, recommender systems are also designed to serve the content p roviders and additional stakeholders [1, 16]. As a result, the recommendations may aﬀect diﬀerent stakeholders, and they may again lead to phenomena that only emerge or become visible over time. For example, an e-commerce platform might try t o recommend items that are favorable in terms of the proﬁt margin. Due to the persuasive eﬀect of recommendations, initially co nsumers might indeed purchase the recommended items more often. Over time, however, consumers might lose their trust in the recommender or even the e-commerce platform as a whole due to repeated negative experiences. Again, such phenomena might not be easily analyzed using the traditional exp erimental approaches discussed above. In this paper, we argue that several of these aspects can be investigated with the help of Agent-based Modeling (ABM) and Simulation [4, 23]. ABM has been successfully applied in a variety of research ﬁelds, including Social Sciences, Economics, and Information Systems, t o mod el complex adaptive systems. It is based on simulating the actions of heterogeneous and autonomous agents, with the goal o f understanding the eﬀects of these actions and the interactions on the entire system in a lo ngitudinal perspective. Thus, ABM is a promising approach that is emerging in recommender systems literat ure for investigating questions related t o dynamics or evolution of a system and its impact over time. ABM is an approach to model complex adaptive systems that are composed of three main building blocks: (i) heterogeneous and autonomous ‘agents’, (ii) the environment in which agents operate, and (iii) interactions among agents and among agents and the environment [21, 22, 31]. ABM follows a generative science approach [10]: The modeling p rocess takes place at micro-level, i.e., at t he level of the three building blocks, and the ultimate goal of the simulation typically is to ob tain macro-level insights from micro-level interactions over a longer period of time, i.e., insights about the collective behavior and emerging phenomena. The dynamics within agent-based models (ABMs) are mainly driven by the set of agents who are usually heterogeneous and autonomously make decisions and take actions. Agents represent either real-world or artiﬁcial entities. Real-world agents in our case could include providers of recommendation services, users of such services, or organizations that provide the items that are su bject to recommendation. These real-worl d agents are described in terms of speciﬁc characteristics, such as objectives, rules to autonomously make decisions, emotional states, and capabilities to collect, process, and interpret information [30, 31]. Artiﬁcial agents, on the other hand, could represent bots or autonomous decision-making entities that are fed b y the methods of AI and machine learning. Agents operate in an environment. What exactly is represented by the environment strongly depends on the research objective and can, for example, be the social context in which agents interact, an actual physical space in which users move around, or the technical environment in which recommendations are provided and received [28]. Interactions can either take pl ace directly by speciﬁed communication rules or indirectly via the environment. Direct communication co uld cover the exchange of information between agents using speciﬁed (direct) communication channels. In a recommendation service context, the d irectly exchanged information can include users’ revealed preferences, perceived usefulness of recommendations, or the trust in the service provider, while indirect communication could be represented by the public opinion that is formed in social networks and emerges from opinion dynamics [2]. I.e., the researcher has to specify the ‘topology of interactions’ which, aside from the structure itself, also includes to model the temporal sequence of interactions [31]. It is important to note that ABM systems can be adaptive, i.e., the populatio n of agents and their characteristics, the environment, and the topology of interactions might change over t ime [13]. In the context of recommendation services, the adaptation might take the form of consumers who learn information and revise their beliefs or adapt their consumption behavior, recommendation service providers that might develop new recommendation strategies, and environments that change as new competit ors enter the market or new social networks form. Also the topology of interactions might be subject to change, e.g., as new communication channels emerge or the agents autonomously decide to interact more or less frequently. Once the building blocks of AB M are deﬁned, the model is implemented in software and ‘solved’ via simulation, so that the emerging patterns can be derived from extensive numerical results [7]. ABM all ows for rich contextualization and for exploring and isolating the eﬀects of diﬀerent factors [31, 32]. Modelling at the micro-level oﬀers exceptional control which not only enables researchers to model co mplex individual behaviors (e.g., to integrate rich assumpt io ns about the users and interactions in terms of bounded rationality and cognitive biases, and network to pology, respectively), but also allows these behaviors of agents to be isolated and speciﬁed with precision. Thus, A BM appears to be particularly suitable if realistic real-world agents should be captured. Studying the emergence of longitudinal eﬀects could, theoretically, also be achieved with longitudinal ﬁeld experiments; however, they might be prohibitively expensive. In contrast, ABM provides a viable and scalable methodology to analyze longitudinal eﬀects in a recommendation context [32]. Generally, simulation-based methodology has been used for stud ying various research questions in the recommender systems literature, including the eﬀect of recommendations on product sales diversity [12], the robustness of recommendation strategies to artiﬁcial manipulations [25], the algorithmic co nfounding in recommender systems [6], and the recommender eﬀects on news consumption [5]. In addition, several stud ies have sp eciﬁcally focused on ABM-based simulation methodo logy, leading to insights about longitudinal dynamics of recommender systems [3, 32, 33]. In particular, [3, 32] show that, if u sers overly rely on the recommendations provided by a system for their consumption choices, then, paradoxically, the system’s quality will diminish over time (e.g., as measured by the system’s prediction accuracy and users’ consumption diversity). Fu rther analyses reveal that a hybrid strategy that combines personalized and (popular) non-personalized item suggestions can lead to a sustainable relevance of the recommendations. T he work presented in [33] fur ther builds on the same ABM approach, but focuses on the longitudinal eﬀects of preference biases. Such eﬀects may occur when the feedback rat ings that consumers give on items do not represent their true preferences but are biased, for example, by the system’s predicted ratings that are shown to consumers along with the suggested items. Among other aspects, the simulations revealed that such ‘poll uted’ preferences are sub sequently reﬂected in the system’s future predictions, leading to a feedback loop where continuously more noisy data is propagated in the system. The works in [32, 33] are based on a general-purpose ABM framework for recommender systems modeling and simulation. The main components of the framework are the users (consumers), the recommendable items, and the recommender engine. The framework allows to model the dynamics of the user agents using several key aspects of user behaviors as related to recommender systems: the lifespan when users are active in the system, users’ preferences for items, users’ item consumption frequ encies, their consumption choice strat egies, their rationale when providing feedback or the likelihood that t hey will provide feedback. The properties and dynamics of the item catalog include the point in time when items become available, their lifespan, and their content descriptions. The modeling of user and item aspects allow the framework to properly and robust ly generate ‘ground tru th’ user preferences for any consumed item. Finally, modeling the recommend er engine, also an agent in the system, involves describing both its functionality (e.g., in terms of its relevance prediction, item ranking, and performance assessment methods) and a representation of the recommender system’s state at a certain point in time (e.g., in terms of the current rating database). Given the individual framework components of [32, 33], an iterative simulatio n procedure is applied. First, the system is initialized with the user popu lation, the item catalog, the rating database and an initial set of recommendations for each user. Additional elements could be added to this environment, for example, the social network of t he users (with its corresponding social inﬂuences). In the main simulation l oop, a subset of the users co nsume one of the recommended items with a certain probability (based on the desired choice strategy); after item consumption, the user determines her preference rating for this item and, based on some probability, decides to sub mit her feedback to the recommender engine. This represents one form of interaction in this framework. Based on this feedback, the engine then upd ates the rating database and prepares recommendations for the next round. In this process, the system also updates the set of active users and items according to the modeled lifespans and consumption st rategies of users and items. Finally, in each simulation step, the engine evaluates and logs its prediction performance and other relevant process metrics, so that performance developments can be tracked over time. Going beyond l ongitudinal eﬀects of consumption strategies [32] and preference biases [33], the ABM framework and suitable extensions c an be used to analyze a multitude of other aspects as well. For instance, in [11, 18] the authors analyze to what extent diﬀerent recommendation algorithms lead to popularity reinforcement (blo ckbuster) eﬀect [12], where already p opular items proﬁt most from recommendations. They also study concentration eﬀects, which is a system’s tendency to increasingly focus its recommendations on fewer items, thereby reducing their level of personalization over time. One main outcome of these studies was that the choice of the algorithm matters, and that certain families of algorithms are less prone to lead to such undesired eﬀects. Numerous other research questions related to longitudinal eﬀects of recommender systems are still underexplored. E.g., there is little research on the long-term negative eﬀects on the trust and behavior of users resulting from ‘bad’ recommendations, which could be caused by a malfunctioning system [8] or by the system not ﬁnding a suitable balance between item relevance and proﬁt margin in a multistakeholder environment [1]. In addition, a recent emerging use of simulation in the recommender systems literature is to create environments against which reinforcement learning (RL) based recommendation al gorithms can be prop erl y benchmarked and compared. Example RL-based simulation platforms include RecSim [15], RecSim NG [24], SOFA [14], RecoGym [27], and PyRecGym [29]. Su c h platforms focus on simulating user feedback based on logged historical data and modeling sequential user behaviors in using RL. Using simulations al lows researchers to optimize, evaluate, and compare RL-based recommendation strategies without having to run online experiments with real users. Althou gh there are some similarities between these systems and the ABM approach, the RL-based simulation platforms are speciﬁcally designed for RL optimization and evaluation and, thus, typically are not ideal for modeling complex and heterogeneous user populations and studying emerging behaviors. ABM is a simulation methodology that has b een successfully applied in various domains to study phenomena that emerge in complex environments over time. In this paper, we argue that ABM represents a highly promising app roach to study longitudinal effects of recommender systems on various stakeholders, i.e., an import ant and practically relevant topic that has been underexplored in research literature.