<title>Novel Measures Reveal Subtle Gender Bias in Academic Job Recommendations</title> Recommendation letters are central to academic hiring; a single negative comment in a letter can derail a candidate. <title>arXiv:2111.09774v2  [physics.soc-ph]  19 Nov 2021</title> The underrepresentation of women in physics has been attributed to less enthusiasti c depictions of thei r ability in letters. We investigated the possibility that letters depict women less favorably than men across two scienti ﬁc disciplines, particle physics (<15% female) and social science (>60% female). We analyzed the largest sample of recommendation letters to date, using more measures than previous studies. Using standard lexical measures, gende r disparities were no greater in physics than in social science, and several gender differences favored women. A novel open-end ed search for all gender-differentiated terms of endorsement revealed language favoring men in physics and women in social science. .. among PhDs in the two social science disciplines in this study (psychology and sociology), with 71.4% and 62.6% of 25). We PhDs, respectively. In c ontrast, women remain signiﬁcantly underrepresented in EPP (only 13.4% of PhDs) ( collected 2,206 re c ommendation letters written on behalf of candidates for positions at the assistant professor level, over multiple job searches between 2011 and 2017. These letters were written for EPP positions at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (963 letters for 206 men; 198 letters for 39 women) and for social science positions at Cornell University (440 letters for 163 men; 605 letters for 222 women; the breakdown of letters by the genders of writer and S1 and Tables S1-S4). the candidate and other relevant information are given in Supplementary Section Previous research has found that recommendation letters written for women are shorter and less enthusiastic than letters for men. Dutt et a l. (18) state “Our results reveal that female applicants are only half as likely to receive excellent letters versus good letters compared to male a pplicants.” Speciﬁca lly, there has been extensive investigation into “standout” and “grindstone” adjectives. In a summary for physicists, Blue et al. ( 26) explain that standout 21), they adjectives are words such as “outstanding,” “amazing,” and “unmatched.” Drawing on Schmader et al. ( conclude: Standout words, which portray a candidate as talented and exciting, are most often fo und in letters of recommendation for men. Grindstone words, which create the impression that a candidate works hard but is not intellectually exc e ptio nal, are more often used for women. This interpretation of “hard-working” as a backhanded compliment is supported in an inﬂuential paper by Trix and 22): Psenka ( Of the letters for female applicants, 34 percent included grindstone adjectives, whereas 23 perc e nt of the letters for male applicants included them. There is an insidious gender schema that associates eﬀort with women, a nd ability with men in professional areas. According to this schema, women are har d-working because they must compensate for lack of ability. 19): Another line of research examined “agentic” and “communal” terms. Madera et al. write ( Agentic b e haviors at work include sp e aking assertively, inﬂuencing o thers, and initiating tasks . Communal behaviors at work include being concerned with the welfare of others (i.e., descriptions of kindness, sympathy, sensitivity, and nurturance), helping others, accepting others’ direction, and maintaining relationships. . . The authors found that agentic terms were more frequent in letters for men and communal terms were more frequent in letters for women. However, these studies were limited by their reliance on a small number of lexical measures that have two important limitations. First, lexica l measur e s rely on lengthy pre-existing lists that may include some words used more for women and others used more for men, with oﬀsetting diﬀerences that could obscure the use of gendered language. For example, compared to men, women might have more descriptions saying they are creative but fewer saying they are innovative, with the aggregate score showing little or no gender diﬀerence. Second, the lexical measures were developed in an earlier era to detect overt bias and may fail to detect new and potentially more s ubtle expressions of bias (Supplementary Section S2 reviews older studies that r e lied on lexical measures.) Accordingly, we reversed the lexical word list methodo logy used in previous r esearch. In addition to star ting with a pre-existing list of words that express enthusiasm and testing for gender diﬀerences in their usage, we also worked backwards, beginning by identifying words associated with gender that were not necessarily contained in any of the word lists and then e valuating whether these gender-diﬀerentiated expressions communicated enthusiasm for the candidate. This bottom-up analysis addresses c oncerns that pre-ex isting word lists may not contain terms that disadvantage women at a time of gr e ater sensitivity to g e nder bias. It also avoids the possibility that words from the same semantic group are nevertheless used diﬀerently for men and women. Previous studies suﬀered from other limitations as well, including the absence of a baseline, small samples, few measures, and the inability to rule out a pplicant characteristics as an alternative explanation for gender diﬀerences in the strength o f le tters. Our study also addresses these limitations: 1. We incorporated a baseline by comparing letters written for candidates in two disciplines diﬀering dramatically in the underrepresentation o f women. When compa ring across disciplines, we do not need to assume the absence of a g e nder gap in accomplishments to attribute a gender gap in the strength of recommendations as an indication of bias. We only need to assume that the gender gap is roughly similar in both disciplines. If we were to observe a larger gender gap in the streng th of letters in EPP compared to social science, then assuming the gender gap in accomplishments is no larg e r in EPP, we can then attribute the disciplinar y diﬀerence to gender bias. 2. We tes ted for diﬀerences between female and ma le writers using a restricted sample of 918 letters for 234 candidates with letters from b oth male and female non-primar y advisors (excluding the PhD committee chair). This method allowed direct comparisons of diﬀerences in how women and men recommenders depicted the same candidates, thereby ruling out gender diﬀerences in candidate accomplishments as an explanation for diﬀerences in letters written by female versus male recommenders . 3. Our study used larger samples with a broader array of measures than those used in previous research (SuppleS2). In addition to the four lexical measures found in nearly all previous research (19, 21, 22) mentary Section (“agentic,” “communal,” “standout,” and “grindstone”), we also used the proportion of total words in the letter that appear in the lists of “achievement” words connoting accomplishment and success, words associated with “ability,” and words that convey aﬀective attraction and aversion (“posemo” and “neg e mo”) ( 27). 4. In addition to these measures of the content of letters, we a lso measured the length of the letter and the status of its authors. Past r e search shows that candidates beneﬁt from longer letters (18). Letters may also have a larger impact depending on the gender and academic rank of the recommender. Given the striking underrepresentation of women in EPP, we were surprised not to ﬁnd weaker letters for women using the standard measure s o f form and content found in much previous research. A. Letter Content. Figure 1 reports the percent of the total words that matched each of eight widely used lexical measures, averaged across a ll letters in four groups based on discipline and author gender (the numerical values S5). Panels A and B show required to perform t-tests and calculate p-values are given in Supplementary Table that (a) female physicists used more positive-aﬀect words (t = 2.41, p = 0.017 ) a nd (b) male physicists used fewer negative-aﬀect words (t = 2.18, p = 0.030) when writing about women than when writing about men. Consistent with previous studies, Panel F shows that male physicists used more “grindstone” words when writing about women (t = 2.25, p = 0.025). However, regardless of either the discipline or the gender of the writer, men were not depicted as more “agentic” or as “standouts,” nor were women depicted as more “communal.” In social science, female writers used “communal” words (Panel H) more frequently than did male writers (t = 3.88, p < 0.001), but they did this equally for male and female candidates in both the full sample and for the subset S2 provides the numbers of letters for both the of candidates with letters from b oth genders (Supplementary Table full and restricted samples). Physicists used more grindstone, communal, and agentic terms than did social scientists, but female and male writers in EPP were equally likely to use these terms. B. Letter Length. Figure 2 (Panel A) shows that letters for women candidates in social science were 65.4 words longer than letters for men (t = 2.33, p = 0.02), while in EPP, letter length did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly by candidate gender. Across both disciplines, women recommenders wrote longer letters than did men, a diﬀerence of 63.4 words 28).) (t = 2.67, p = 0.008). (A similar eﬀect has been observed for surgical res ident letters ( 1 may reﬂect the inability D. Open-ended Analysis. The similarity of content in letters for women and men in Figure of pre-existing word lists to capture gender bias for two reasons. First, each list contains many individual e xpressions, some o f which may favor women and others favor men, such that the ag gregate score obscures what may be important gender disparities. Second, these lexical measures were developed and validated in an earlier era in which women were underrepresented even in social science disciplines and sensitivity to overt bias was relatively weak. Contemporary letters may reﬂect changes in cultural awareness and normative expectations that discourage the use of red-ﬂag expressions, even though letters still contain subtle expressions of gender bias that are not included in, and therefore cannot be found with, the standard word lists used in all prior studies. We addressed these concerns using an op e n-ended analysis that reverses the word list methodology used in previous studies. Instead of starting with words that might indicate enthusiasm and then measuring their gender distribution, we considered every word in every letter as a potential source of gender bias and then eliminated those without gendered usag e or relevance to hiring. The remaining gender diﬀerences are potentially problematic, even if the inﬂuence of the content on hiring dec isions is not always immediately apparent. Are letters of reco mmendatio n relatively androgynous? Are gender diﬀerences in word choice la rger in EP P than in social science? Do the diﬀerences favor one gender over the other? The screening began by a lgorithmically removing “stop words,” personal pronouns, and words with little or no diﬀerence in gendered usage, leaving a set of 405 words that were potential sources of gender bias. Two of the senior authors, a physicist and a socia l scientist, then independently (without knowing each other’s choices) eliminated words that did not signal recommendation without knowing the gender distribution. This included the elimination of terms like “family” and “neuroscience,” for which a gender diﬀerence might indicate gender-speciﬁc subﬁeld specializations (e.g., social sc ie nce women are overrepresented in the study of family and men are overrepresented in neuroscience). We also eliminated words with overtly context-dependent meaning (e.g., “conﬁdent” could refer to the candidate or to the writer ). The screening process left a list of 63 words a s potential indicators of gender bias based on gendered usage and relevance to hiring. However, the direction and magnitude of bias were still unknown. We then s temmed the words on the list, replacing the original word with the entire “family” of sema ntically consistent words that shared a common root. Figure 3 repor ts the fraction of letters that contained one or more usages of a member of the word family. 1 and 3 use diﬀerent measurement units, and these units need to be considered when interpreting the Figures 1 reports the fraction of words in a letter results of each ﬁgure and when comparing across the two ﬁgures. Figure that a ppea r in a lengthy word list (the “per-word” measure). Fig ure 3 reports the fraction of letters with one or more us ages of a single word or word family (the “per-letter” measure). Figure 1 does not use the per-letter measure because nearly every reco mmendatio n letter can be expected to contain one or more terms that appear in a long list of superlatives. Hence the per-letter measure is likely to underestimate the level of gender bias using a lexical analysis, and all pre vious studies that used lexical analysis relied on this same per-word measure that we use in Figure 1. Figure 3 uses the per-letter measure because a word randomly chosen from a long letter has a near-zero probability to match a particular superlative that is being used to distinguish one candidate from another. Although this “pe r letter” measure is not useful for widely used terms like “research” that appear one or mo re times in nearly every letter, regardless of gender, these terms have almost no discriminating power and are therefore likely to understate the level of gender bias. For terms that letter writers use sparingly (such as “brilliant”), and S3 which therefore eﬀectively distinguish candidates, the per-letter measure is appropriate. (Supplementary Section contains additional comments on the diﬀerence between per-word and p er-letter measur ements.) The open-ended analys is revealed gender diﬀerences that were not evident in the lexical analyses in Figure or in letter length and authorship in Figure 2. Gendered language favored women in social science, but in EPP, the disparity favored men. Of the 16 gender-diﬀerentiated terms of endorsement found in social science letters, 12 were mor e likely to be used to describe female candida tes (p = 0.027), compared to only two out of eleven gender-diﬀerentiated terms in EPP (p = 0.028). Importantly, the open-ended measure also revealed subtle bias in social science. References to contributions to knowledge (using terms like “science,” “discovery,” and technical expertise) were more likely to be emphasized in social science letters for men. In contrast, personal attributes (volunteering, delightfulness, initiative, leadership, ambition, accomplishment, success, and commitment) were emphasized more often for women. The largest disparities were in social science letters written by men. “Commit*” appears in 24.5% of letters ab out women, compared to 13.6% of letters about men, p < 0.0008), while “scienc*” is mentioned in 54.6% of letters for men but only 45.6% of letters for women (p < .03). O f the 12 terms use d more for women, only one, “volunteer*,” is not used by male writers more than female writers. This reﬂects in part the greater statistical power for male-authored (N = 600) than female-authored (N = 445) letters). However, of the four terms used more for men, only one, “scienc*,” is not used by female writers more than by male writers. In contrast to the disparity favoring women candidates in social science, the gender disparity in EPP strongly favored male candidates whose letters were more likely to contain nine out of eleven gender-diﬀerentiated terms of endorsement. As in social science, “technical*” and “discover*” (as reference s to c ontributions to knowledge) were used more often for men, but unlike social science, male candidates were also more likely to be personally characterized as intellectual, creative, innovative, dedicated, and talented. Only two terms were use d more for women: “notabl*” 29, 30) that “brilliance” was more and “brilliant*.” The latter is surprising, given recent ﬁndings by Leslie et al. ( highly re garded in STEM dis c iplines with a lower representation of women. Nonetheless, “brilliant*” was much more likely to be used in physics letters about women (8.6%) than men (3.4%) (Supplementary Table S6 supplies the raw counts a nd the counts for “brilliant” are further broken down by gender of writer and candidate in Supplementary Table S7.) Nearly all gender disparities in EPP were in letters by men, possibly due to very low statistical power for letters by and about women (N = 22). The two exceptions (“technical*” and “dedicat*”) both favored men. Comparing the two disciplines, two of the largest ge nder disparities were for the terms “physicist*” in EPP and “scien*” in socia l s c ie nce . These two expressions were used more often in letters for men than in letters for women (50.6% vs. 36.9% for “physicist*” (p < 0.0 01) and 61.6% vs. 55.0% for “scien*” (p = 0 .03). This could reﬂect — and possibly reinforce — unconscious gender stereotypes in which physicists and sc ientists are imagined as being men. That might not be surprising in an overwhelmingly male discipline, but it is noteworthy tha t the gender dispa rity for “scien*” is one o f the la rgest in a discipline that is majority female. In sum, the op en-ended analysis reveals a clear overall pattern of g e nder diﬀerences in the probability that a letter contains a term of endorsement, with the diﬀerences favoring men in EPP and women in soc ial science. Moreover, 3 omits four expressions whose high usage frequency causes substantively minor gender diﬀerences to be Figure statistically signiﬁcant. In social science, references to research and teaching appear in 97% and 75% of all letters, respectively. References to research occur once per letter for female candidates and 0.90 times per letter for male candidates (p = 0.008), and references to teaching occ ur 0.40 times per female letter and 0.30 times per male letter 3. (p < 0.001). Other minor diﬀerences in usage of “standard language” ran counter to the overall pattern in Figure In social science, “publish*” is used 0.12 times pe r female letter and 0.14 times per male letter (p = 0.045). In EPP, over half the letters co ntain references to “scien*,” with 0.2 usage s per female letter and 0.15 per male letter (p = 0.01). The underrepresentation of women in math-intensive a cademic disciplines like particle physics is a persistent pr oblem that has resisted remedial eﬀorts. We investigated gender bias in letters of recommendation as a potential contributor, using a comparison to the social sciences in the same time period as a benchmark for what might be expected in a discipline with gender parity. Using measures similar to those in previous research, we found little evidence of systematic gender bias. In social science, letter le ngth favored women ca ndida tes, but the higher proportion of male-authored letters for male candidates could favor men, given the historical legacy of gendered status inequality. In EPP, conventional lexical measures identiﬁed three signiﬁcant diﬀerences, two of which favored women: letters for women candidates contained more positive aﬀect in letters written by women a nd less negative aﬀect in letters written by men. Women wrote fewer than 10 % of the EPP letters, so less negative aﬀect in the larger proportion of letters by men could be more consequential than the gr e ater use of positive aﬀect in the smaller proportion of EPP letters by women. Male physicists also used more “grindstone” words when writing for women, which is consistent with previous studies and has been interpreted a s a backhanded compliment based on the ass umption that “eﬀort” 26). However, Panel F in and “har d-working” are g e nder-biased code-words implying pedestrian research by women ( Figure 1 raises the possibility of an alternative interpretation. Male and female physicists used “grindstone” words twice as often as did social scientists, for all candidates regardless of gender, suggesting the possibility tha t these references have a positive connotation in usage by physicists. Across both disciplines, we did not observe diﬀerences 19, 21). found in previous studies showing that women are less likely to be depicted as “agentic” or “standouts” ( 1), as well as letter In sum, an exhaustive analysis o f letter content using conventional lexical measures (Figure length and authorship (Figure 2), revealed gender disparities that, overall, were no greater in EPP than in social science, and some diﬀerences could be interpreted as representing an advantage for women over men. Simply put, using the standard lexical measure s common in the literature, we did not ﬁnd evidence of systematic gender bias in physics, nor evidence that ge nder bias is greater in physics compared to social science. Our c ore argument, however, is that these results do not lead us to c onclude that rec ommendation letters are free of gender bias. The standard lexical measure s rely on lengthy pre-existing lists that may include some words used more for women and others used more for men, with oﬀsetting diﬀerences that could obscure the use of g e ndered language. For example, compared to men, women might have more descriptions saying they are creative but fewer saying they are innovative, with the ag gregate score showing little or no ge nder diﬀerence. There may also be genderdiﬀerentiated words not in the word lists but which confer enthusiasm, along with words that do not overtly express enthusiasm but may indicate the use of gendered languag e in letters of recommendation. We therefore supplemented the standard lexical measures with an open-ended s e arch tha t checked every word in every letter for gender diﬀerences in usage. This methodolo gy has never been used in previous studies of gender bias in letters of recommendation. The analysis revealed gendered use of language favoring women candidates in social science (a discipline that is over 60% female) but favoring men in physics (a discipline that is under 15% female). For example, men in physics were signiﬁcantly more likely than women to be described as talented, intellectual, innovative, and creative. In co ntrast, women were more likely to be described as “brilliant,” a more highly regarded 29). Two of the largest gender disparities were for term in STEM disciplines with a lower representation of women ( “physicist*” in EPP and “scien*” in social science, both used more often in letters for men than for women. Although other explanations are possible, future research should investigate the possibility that recommendations can reﬂect unconscious gender stereotypes in which physicists and scientists are imagined as men, not only in a discipline that is overwhelmingly male but also in a discipline that is majority female. There are limitations of the open-ended methodology a s well. First, our analysis focused on gendered language and tested to see w ho was favored by the disparity. Accordingly, Figure 3 did not include the much larger number of expressions of endorsement that were equally likely to be used in letters about women and men. Second, the interpretation of individual words depends on c ontext, and even words that unambiguously express enthusiasm have unknown eﬀects on hiring decisions. This study focuse d on the attributes of letters that might inﬂuence hiring 3 reveals g e nder diﬀerences in how letters decisions, not on how decision-makers respo nd to these attributes. Figure are written, not how they are read. We did not examine whether that disparity aﬀected hiring decisions, an important problem that falls outside the scope of a lex ic al analysis. Although Figure 3 includes terms like “brilliant*,” “talent*,” and ‘creativ*” who se stem variants are included in word lists use d for Figure 1 and have been validated as exerting a n inﬂuence on hiring, other terms (e.g., “delightful” and “physicist*”) have not been shown to systematically inﬂuence hiring. Nonetheless, the gendered language is inconsistent with the assumption that letters for female candidates are indistinguishable from letters for males. Moreover, even if letters are written in an unbiased manner, they 6, 8, 31). Future rese arch should use r andomized might still be read in a biased manner by search committees ( trials to manipulate the apparent candidate-gender of identical letters to test the possibility that search committee deliberations favor men in the evaluation of letters, despite the similarity of letters for women and men applicants. All the methods we used share a common limitation: We cannot rule out the possibility that female candidates were in fact superior to male candidates and deserved stronger letters than those they received. However, we controlled for candidate qualities when assessing gender diﬀerences between recommenders for candidates with letters from both genders. In addition, we compared EPP to a benchmark discipline with gender parity. Assuming that gender diﬀerences in candidate qualiﬁcations are no greater in EPP than in social science, our results might change very little were we able to completely co ntrol for candidate qualiﬁcations . This applies as well to the diﬀerences we o bs erved between the lexical and o pen-ended measures. In addition, although our sample is much larger than those in previous analyses of gender diﬀerences in letters of recommendation, we may have underestimated the number of signiﬁcant diﬀerences due to insuﬃcient statistical power based on 1,045 letters in social science and 1,161 in EPP. It is also possible that we overestimated the number 1 and 2 tested of signiﬁcant diﬀerences by using the conventio nal 0.05 benchmark for statistical signiﬁcance. Figures for gender diﬀerences on ten letter attributes (letter length, author ra nk, and eight diﬀerent lexical dimensions ), broken down by discipline and writer gender, plus author gender broken down by discipline. O ut of 4 4 sig niﬁcance tests using a conventional benchmark of p < 0.0 5, we should expect two false positives if the null hypothesis were 1 would have been statistically true. Had we lowered α to 0.001, none of the observed lexical diﬀerences in Figure signiﬁcant, and only the diﬀerences ass ociated with the gender of writers in social science (Figure 2) would remain signiﬁcant. 3 is particularly vulnerable to false pos itives, and caution is therefor e warranted The open-ended approach in Fig ure in drawing infere nce s of gender bias in the use of any individual term. Of the 27 terms in Figure 3, only three ge nder diﬀerences would remain signiﬁcant with p < 0.001 : “physicist*” and “intellectu*” in EPP (both favoring men) and “commit*” in social science, favoring female candidates. However, the overall pattern in Figure 3 is unlikely to be random. T he sign of the gender diﬀerence will be random if the diﬀerence is a false positive, given that the meas ure takes into account gender diﬀerences in the number and length of letters. If all 27 terms in Figure 3 were false positives, an equal number would be expected to favor each gender. The probability that only two out of eleven random diﬀerences would favor women in EPP is 0.027, which supports the rejection of the null hypothesis that the diﬀerences are fa lse po sitives. Moreover, given the per sistent gender imbalance in many math-intensive disciplines, a false negative in tests for gender bias might be equally serious if it were use d to justify existing practices that systematically favor ma le c andidates. Furthermore , using the same p < 0.05 benchmark a s previous studies makes a dir e ct comparison possible; using a more stringent criterion precludes an “apples -to-apples” comparison. Caution is also needed when generalizing these results from entry-level to senior positio ns , from EPP to all of physics, from two high-proﬁle institutions to all of science, and from National Laboratories to universities. Similarly, we do not wish to overgeneralize from the samples in sociology and psychology to all of the social sciences, or from Cornell University to the entire s et of universities. At the same time, it is also important to note that candidates typically apply to dozens of positions, and letters for a given candidate rarely diﬀer substantively from one search to ano ther. We therefore expect that the letters in o ur samples are likely to r e semble those submitted by these applicants to other searches beyond these two institutions. In closing, o ur study has vital practical implica tio ns. Future research on letter content should also include an openended se arch for all expressions of endorsement with gender disparities. Lexical analyses using word lists obtained from previous studies indicated ge nder disparities in EPP letters that were no greater than those obser ved in social science ﬁelds in which women are well-represented. However, our open-ended search of all gender-diﬀerentiated words revealed terms of endorsement that were us e d more often in EPP to depict men and in social science to depict women. Normative expectations about language evolve alongside changes in gender distribution. Word lists that were sensitive to overt expressions of bias in an earlier time period may need to be supplemented by open-ended measures. Our s tudy also has implications for hiring practices. Disciplines with extreme gender dis parities need to proactively engage faculty to raise awareness of subtle as well as overt biases in how letters are written for job candidates and how they are read. At the same time, we also caution against over-reaction. It is highly unlikely that biased letters are the principal cause of women’s underrepresentation in the workplace. Policies to correct gender imbalances in math-intensive ﬁelds may be more eﬀective if they target barriers in addition to bias in letters of recommendation, such as how letters are evaluated, and obstacles tha t discourage women from pursuing math-intensive academic careers. We thank Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) and Cornell University for use of the letters. We would also like to thank the developer of LIWC, Prof. James W. Pennebaker of the University of Texas, Austin, for valuable discussions. M.W.M. tha nk s the National Science Foundation (SBR 2049207 and SBR 175 6822) for funding during the time the research was conducted. Authors declare no competing interest. There is no situation that could be perceived as exerting an undue inﬂuence on the presentation of their work. This body of work is not inﬂuenced by ﬁnancial, professional, co ntractual, or personal r e lationships or situations. https://github.com/rhbob/genderDiﬀerences, in the SuppleAll data and code used in this study are available at mentary Materials, or can be provided by the authors without undue delay. <title>Supplementary Information for</title> <title>Novel Measures Reveal Subtle Gender Bias in Academic Job Recommendations</title> S1 contains the sample size for each category examined in this study. This study considered Fermilab searches Table for four years starting with the search starting in October 2014 and ending with the search starting in October 2017. As can be seen, the smallest category is that of female candidates with letters by female wr iters, N = 22. This reﬂects the phenomenon that motivated our analysis — the dearth of women in EPP. Table S2 gives the number of candidates with letters from writers of both genders used in our “matched-pair” analysis. Our assignment of gender is binary: male or female depending on name and pronoun use. No candidates or writers supplied a preference for non-binary choices. How do the ﬁndings of the current study compare with those from prior studies? Here we exa mine all previo us studies of academic letters, some of which have reported divergent results from the current study, which as was seen, found few gender diﬀerences, most of which favored women. In this section we highlight four possible reasons for any inconsistencies between these results and former ones. 1. Date: All but one of the prior studies that reported ﬁndings inconsistent with the current study are older than the current study, sometimes much older. This could result in disparities because of the dramatic attention in the last decade to gender bias in STEM (6), including massive media attention (#MeToo, #TimesUp) that has been recognized inside the academy. Be havior may have changed in rec e nt years bec ause of this growing awareness, and fewer gender gaps may exist today than 10-20 years ago when the letters were written for many 28). of the co ntradictory ﬁndings, a po int made by others recently ( 2. Diﬀerent ﬁelds: Some previous studies examined applicants for jobs in ﬁelds that are less math-intensive and have much greater female representations than EPP (for example, medicine, biology, a nd geoscience). It is therefore even more curious that some of these studies found gender bias in letters of recommendation, while we found little evidence of gender bias in EPP. We therefore urge extreme caution in generalizing our results beyond EPP and our two subﬁelds of the social sciences, including even other subﬁelds of physics such as theoretical particle physics. The core values for a ﬁeld s uch as EPP, which requires large collaborative eﬀorts (hence, a possibly greater emphasis on communal and grindstone traits), may diﬀer from ﬁelds in which research is ca rried out by much smaller collaborative teams or e ven by lone individuals. Again, the So c ial Sciences are usually less collaborative and math-intensive than E PP and have dramatically higher representations of women than EPP so we expected the Social Science eﬀects if anything to b e markedly smaller, which they were not. 3. Diﬀerent levels of jobs: Some prior studies that are seemingly contradictory with the current study involved letters for job levels that were lower-status than those in the current study, which were for elite positions at Fermilab and Cornell. In contrast, many but certainly not all past studies foc us e d on candidates for normal post-doctoral fellowships, residencies, and internships rather than tenure-track-equivalent positions. 4. Nationality of writers: Some prior ﬁndings, particularly Dutt et al., that are inconsistent with the current ﬁndings contained a large proportion of letter s written by reco mmender s from outside America. That study ﬁnds non-US letters are much shorter and they are less enthusiastic than letters written by American scientists 18). Thus, there is evidence that diﬀerences in letter length and tone vary signiﬁcantly across cultures, with letters written by Americans being longer and more po sitive than those emanating from other regions. The vast majority of the letters in the present study were written by Americans; in contrast, in Dutt et al., 530 out of 1,224 letters were w ritten by s c ie ntists outside the US. Thus, the current study clariﬁes what (until now) has been a set of seemingly co ntradictory ﬁndings that result from studies that are mostly small-scale and based on samples lacking important controls (such as the unavailability of letters for unsuccessful applicants, or too small subsa mples of female writers to do gender e d analyses). Some, but not all, of these earlier studies have reported evidence of gender bias; however, there are many exceptions and contradictions that we enumerate next. 5. Sample size: The current study is base d on one of the largest sample of le tters thus far examined, 2,206 letters. 23) to 2,6 25 letters (32). This is important because the smaller samples Prior studies varied from 237 letters ( precluded examining correlations be tween the gender of applicant and the gender of the writer. As noted in elsewhere in this article, it is important to remember that c andidates typically apply to ma ny positions and letters for a given candidate rarely diﬀer substantively from one search to another. Therefore, the letters in our samples are likely to re semble those submitted by these applicants to other searches beyond these two institutions. Nonetheless, caution is needed when generalizing these results; for example, the internal culture of EPP, with large collaboratio ns requiring communal behavior, may diﬀer from other ﬁelds of physics. 6. Dependent variables: With the exception o f McCarthy et al. ( 33), the current study employs the larges t number of dependent variables: length, agentic, communal, grindstone, standout, achievement, positive aﬀect, neg ative aﬀect, ability, homophily, and writer status. 7. Control of background: Only a few prior studies attempted to control for applicants’ per sonal characteristics (by using number of publications, conference presentations, class rank, and/or awards as covariates). These are less than ideal controls for other ways applicants can diﬀer (e.g., status of their mentor, quality of the journals in which they publish, prestige of their university, their contribution to multi-authored studies). In contrast, the current s tudy included an analysis of a subsample of 918 of the 2,206 letters for candidates with letters from both ge nders, neither of whom was the ca ndidates primary advisor. Each candidate there by contributed to the measures for ea ch writer gender. This minimizes diﬀerences between male and female candidates caused by ge nder diﬀerences in applicants’ personal characteristics. However, it does not address the possibility that diﬀerences in letters for male and female candidates might reﬂect unmeasured diﬀerences in candidate q ualiﬁcations. 8. Comparing disciplines that diﬀer in women’s representation: The c urrent study contrasted two disciplines in which women are disparately represented. Only one prior study examined a math-intensive ﬁeld, the analysis of 18). This current study examined an even more male-dominated letters for postdoctoral positions in geoscience ( ﬁeld, EPP (Elementary Particle Physics) and contrasted it with ﬁelds with high female representation, psychology and socio logy. This contrast provided a principled basis for the expectation of larger corr e lations between gender and the dependent variables w ithin the less female-represented ﬁeld, EPP. In sum, the curre nt study was much larger and contained more measures than in most former studies. 22) analyzed 300 letters written on behalf o f applicants S2A. Detailed description of prior studies. Trix and Psenka ( for faculty positions at a single U.S. medical school. The letters were wr itten in the mid-1990s, preceding the secular movements tha t occurred two deca des later. Unfortunately, Trix and Psenka only had access to letters written on behalf of successful applicants, precluding a comparison with unsuccessful letters. They also were unable to analyze their data a s a function of letter writer’s gender, due to their small sample, rendering their results mor e narrative than quantitative. Like the current study, they found no diﬀerences in the frequency of letters that contained standout terms (58% for men vs. 63% for women). However, they found that letters written for men tended to repeat standout terms: on average, such letters contained 2 .0 standout terms vs. only 1.5 for women’s letters. Because of the unavailability of letters for unsuccessful candidates, ther e is no way of knowing how instrumental these features were in hiring decisions. Trix and Psenka also found that letters for women contained twice as many “doubt-raisers” as did letters for men. Finally, like Dutt et al., they found that letters by writers from Europe were shorter: “Even letters fro m Canada were less hype rb olic than those from the USA. But we did not have enough letters to make more than general observations.” Thus, Trix and Psenka (22) study was limited by its small sample size, a single institution, a nd a single ﬁeld (medicine), and the authors were unable to analyze letters for unsucces sful candidates or as a function of the ge nder of the writer, precluding many of the analyses in the current study. Despite these limitations, Trix and Psenka provided a rich narrative analysis that inﬂuenced the hypotheses in the current study. Messner and Shimahara’s (2008) study was twice as large as Trix and Psenka’s, 763 letters vs. 300 letters, written on behalf o f applicants for a 1-year residency in otolaryngology/head and neck surgery at Stanfor d University’s Medical School ( 24). Only 8.8% of letters were written by women, which limited gender of applicant × gender of writer analyses. They found that all letters were quite positive, which echoes Dutt et al.’s ﬁnding that roughly 98.5% of letters were either good or excellent. However, Messner and Shimahara found that letters written for women contained mo re communal terms (e.g., team player, compass ionate), and male writers were more likely to mention a female applicant’s physical a ppea rance. They found that 86% of all letters contained standout terms (averaging 2.6 per letter). However, like the current ﬁndings — and unlike Trix and Psenka’s — stando ut terms did not diﬀer by gender of applicant. They also found that doubt raisers (present in 19 % of letters) did not diﬀer by gender of applicant, unlike Madera et al. and Trix and Psenka, both of which reported more “doubt-raisers ” for women 19, 22). Finally, unlike most studies (e.g., Trix and Psenka’s), Messner and Shimahara did not ﬁnd a applicants ( diﬀerence in letter length as a function of gender of writer or gender of applicant, nor did they ﬁnd a correlation between letter length and favorability. However, the mean length of their letters was less than half o f the length in the current study: female writers’ letters = 345 words, male letter writers’ letters = 328 words (not statistically signiﬁcant); in contrast, the mean length of letters in the current study ranged between 915 -960 words, which is considerably longer than letters written in other studies. Our much longer letters will be qualitatively diﬀerent, with more depth and detail. Co mparisons between these two sets are then complicated by the ev ident diﬀerence in the commitment of the writer. 18) analyzed 1,224 recommendation letters, In a larger study of letters written for geoscience postdocs, Dutt et al. ( submitted by writers from 54 countries (43% were from outside the U.S.), for postdoctoral fellowships in a single ﬁeld, geosciences, submitted betwe e n 2007 and 2012. Unlike Messner and Shimahara, Dutt and her colleagues found 24). However, like both Messner and Shimahara as well as that letters written for women contained fewer words ( the current study — but unlike Trix and Psenka — Dutt et al.’s letters contained similar numbers of standout words and more grindstone words. Although these researchers found that female applicants were only half as likely as men to receive excellent letters, they found no evidence that male and female recommenders diﬀered in their likelihood to write str onger letters for male applicants. Like Trix and Psenka, they also fo und that letters from American writers were on average 561 words whereas those written by Africans, (305 words), So uth Asians (275 words) and East Asians (320 words) were notably shorter; even Europea ns, New Zealanders and Australians wrote shorter letters (345 words) than American writers. In contrast to the current ﬁndings, Dutt et al. concluded: “these results suggest that women are sig niﬁcantly less likely to receive excellent reco mmendatio n letters than their male counterparts at a critical juncture in their career.” Madera et al. (19) analyzed 624 letters from an earlier study that had been written for 174 applicants who had applied fo r positions in academic psychology at a single R1 university. Letters written for females contained more doubt-raisers , even after controlling for personal accomplishments (number of ﬁrst-authored publications, honors, etc.) In this regard, their ﬁndings agree d with several of the ab ove studies (e.g., Trix and Psenka ( 22)) but disagreed with several others. 23) analyzed 237 letters written on behalf of applicants to a four-year e mergency medicine residency Li et al. ( at Northwestern University. Of the ﬁfteen dimensions they analyzed, only three revealed gender diﬀerences: letters written for female applicants were slightly long e r, contained more ability terms that refer red to expertise, competence, and intelligence, and also more aﬃliative/communal terms that referred to teamwork, helpfulness, communication, 22) they found no gender diﬀerences in compassion, and empathy. Unlike other studies such as Trix and Psenka ( doubt-raisers , grindstones, or standouts. Overall, they found little evidence of gender bias in letters, although the sp e c ial nature of the application process may have inﬂuenced their ﬁndings (including the constraints that letters were limited to 250 words in leng th and only the top quarter of applicants were invited to apply to apply. 21) examined 886 letters written for 235 male and 42 female applicants for a chemistry/biochemistry Schmader et al. ( faculty position at a single R1 university. Sample sizes were too small to analyze data by gender of writer × gender of applicant, so many of the analyses in the current study were not possible. The word count o f letters for women was 604 words vs. 555 for men. They found no gender diﬀerences in the frequency of grindstone words. However, unlike the current study and several others, recommenders used signiﬁcantly mor e standout adjectives to describe male than female applicants. Letters containing more standout words also included fewer grindstone words, which runs counter to the current study’s ﬁnding of weak statistical relationship (r = −0.04) between the co-occurrence of grindstones and standouts. Interestingly, in the ear lier analysis, Madera et al. ( 19) analyzed 624 letters written for 194 a pplicants in psychology and found that male r e c ommenders wrote 262 letters for male applicants and 194 letters for female applicants; in contrast, female recommenders wrote 78 letters for male applica nts and 109 letters for females. Hence, to some extent they resemble the current study’s ﬁnding that male applicants submit more letters from male writers than from female writers and the reverse trend for females, which the current study did not ﬁnd (that study found homophily only for males in the Social Sciences). Madera et al. also found that women were describe d as more communal and le ss agentic than men, neither of which was found in the current study. Finally, although they found more agentic adjectives in letters for males, there was no diﬀerence in “age ntic orientation”, a summary of indices of how much writers referred to the applicants as active, dynamic, and achievers (using words such as “earn”, “insight”, “think”, “know”, and “do”). The s tudy of recommendation letters has continued to the present: we examine two we found of particular rele vance. Powers et al. (32) studied a larger sample than ours for an orthopaedic residency program in 2018, examining 2625 letters for both race and gender. The reference letters were standardized to reduce potential bias, a relatively new idea. The researches concluded (UiO indicating “underrepresented in orthopaedics”): Small diﬀerences were found in the categories of words used to describe male and female candida tes and white and UiO candidates. These diﬀerences were not present in the standardized LOR compared with traditional LOR. It is possible that the use of standardized LOR may reduce gender- and race-based bias in the narrative assessment of applicants. The study was performed using LIWC 2015 for the standard categories: agentic/communal, standout/grindstone, and ability. Interestingly, the researchers concluded that standardized letters of refer e nce may only produce a small eﬀect. They also made an interesting speculation that a orthopaedics-foc used word list may have obscured bias; our reverse methodology addresses this issue and is a powerful method for going beyond LIWC or other pre-deﬁned lists. These authors also note: A similar discrepancy has been noted in studies analyzing letters of rec ommendation for s urgical residency and suggests that applicants preferentially ask men faculty over women faculty for letters of recommendation... If applicants believe tha t letters from writers of higher aca demic rank carry more weight, then the larger proportion of men at higher academic r ank could be one explanation for this diﬀerence... These authors also hypothesized a rank/weight correlation, but we observed no signiﬁcant eﬀect. 34) studied 2834 letters in another orthopaedic residency study. Their conclusions, again using Kobayashi et al. ( LIWC 2015, were quite similar to ours: Although there were some minor diﬀerence s favoring women, language in letters of recommendation to an academic orthopaedic surgery residency program were overall similar between men and women applicants... Given the similarity in language be tween men and women applicants, increasing women applicants may be a more important factor in addressing the gender gap in orthopaedics. The authors made some of the same points regarding the limitations of word lists made in Powe rs et al. ( 32) and in the curre nt work. To recap, amidst many similar ﬁndings , there were also many diﬀerences between the current study and fo rmer studies, any of which might be responsible for inconsistencies when they occurred. There a re no studies directly comparable with the current study: they are either older (predating the recent focus on gender issues in STEM), not written on behalf of applicants for tenure-equivalent positions in STEM ﬁelds, and/or written for less mathintensive STEM ﬁelds that have higher r e presentations of women, or written by writers from diﬀerent cultures. These diﬀerences may par tly explain why we found less evidence of gender bias against women c andidates than 26): might have been expected from statements made in articles such as the following ( Standout words in letters of recommendation. . .portray a candidate as ta le nted and exciting, (and) are most often found in letters of recommendation for men. Grindstone words crea te the impression that a candidate works hard but is not intellectually exc eptional, (and) are more often use d for women. . .As a result of that discrepancy, female candidates seem both mor e bor ing and less intellectually promising than their male competitors. This article appeared in Physics Today, a magaz ine for members of the American Physical Society, not a pee rreviewed journal; it was written for physicists who wanted to unders tand the general issue and accurately reﬂected a distillation of common sentiment. In contrast, the current study found that letters written for women and men in exp erimental particle physics (EPP) contained consistent occur rences of standout words. Despite the eﬀect sizes in many studies being ab out one word p e r letter, it has bee n argued that “only one statement 19). For terms that letter writers use sparingly, and which eﬀectively distinguish candidates can make a diﬀerence” ( (such as “br illiant”), the pe r-letter measure is appropriate. “Research” is mentioned one o r more times in nearly every letter, and hence there may be a strong signal in writing a letter that never mentions “research.” In contrast, if a writer uses “research” twice in one letter, that does not necessarily indicate that the writer was more enthusiastic than if they ha d used that same term only once. The mea surement of the per-letter rate removes eﬀects from repetition, allowing us to examine the “one statement” argument by using our ope n-ended analysis to isolate words and word families with a signiﬁcant male-female diﬀerence without the need for the unblinded creation of new word categories . We noted in the main text that men in the Social Sciences tended to receive letters from male writer s. The existence of this gender homophily is independent of the actual ratio in the pool of possible writers: either the ratio is the same fo r male or female ca ndidates or it is not. We stress that any expected value doe s not change the dis c repancy between men and women applicants: a change in expectatio n only changes the relative degree of homophily assigned to male or female candidates. The NSF’s 2017 Survey of Doctoral Recipients (25) tells us the social science fraction for women is just over 60%; in EPP, it gives 0.16 for all of EPP in 2017. A far more extensive demographic study would be required to determine a mo re precise expectatio n, but the large diﬀerence is established independent of that expectation. We use random permutation to generate a distribution of diﬀerences in word frequency under the assumption that word frequency is independent of gender . For each permutation, we shuﬄe the candidate gender labels and compute the t-score for the diﬀerence in frequency with pooled variance. We compare the t-score for the observed diﬀerence in word frequency against the distribution of the t scores across 100,000 permutations and compute the proportion of permutation t- scores that are less extr e me than the observed diﬀerence. To limit the false discovery rate, we use a method akin to a Bonferroni correction: we compare the obs erved t-score for ea ch word against the distribution of the most extreme t-scores observed in each of the sampled permutations (35). The proportion of permutations with more extreme values than the observed value gives a p-value for the observation. We also compute the uncorrected p-value by comparing the observed score for each word against the distribution of scores obtained for that word across the permutations. We examined a subset of frequent words whose uncorrected p-values were signiﬁcant at α = 0.95. From the initial set of 646 words in Socia l Science and 473 words in physics, we selected words with an average word frequency exceeding 10 in le tters for at le ast one gender, yielding 218 words for Social Science and 159 for physics. Since the average letter length was abo ut 1000 words, a fr e quency of 10 translates into an average of approximately once per ten letters. For each word in these subsets, we identiﬁed words describing a resear ch area by inspecting randomly selected examples of the word from one of these categories were dropped. For e xample, the term “family” appears in the Social Science corpus ab out thre e times more often in letters for female candidates than in letters for male candidates. The t-score for the observed diﬀerence in average letter proportions is -4.47 (df=1039). The permutation test yields three two relevant comparison distributions generated under the independence assumption: (1 ) because the observed value is negative, the distribution of the minimal t-score observed for any word in each permutation and (2) the distribution of t-scores observed for “family” in each permutation. We ﬁnd that only 176 of 100,000 permutations have a minimum t-score less than the observed t-score, which translates to a corrected p-value of 0.00176. The observed t-sc ore is greater than any t-score obtained from permutation, so the non-corrected p-value is 1/100,001. Based on our examination of random samples drawn from the text, we determined that the use of the word “family” is overwhelmingly related to candidate research area (for example, “she does research on family processes”) rather than to the candidate’s personal life. We computed term frequency by averaging within-letter frequency ac ross the letters which yields frequencies compar able to the LIWC scores used in the main analysis. Word counts were generated for each letter using the CountVectorizer from 36). We generated within-letter frequencies by dividing the scikit-learn, with the tokenizer set to retain hyphens ( within-letter word counts by the total word count for the letter (including non-vocabulary words).