Cenxi Yuan,Noritaka Shimizu,Zs. Podoly´ak,Toshio Suzuki, National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, 48824, USA School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China The rapid neutron-capture proce ss (r process) is believed to be a key origin of the heavy nuclides found in nature [1]. The properties of nuclei, such as masses, halflives, and neutr on capture cross sections, are essential for understanding the r -process nucleosynthesis [2]. For example, the A = 195 abundance peak in the r proc ess is associated with the properties of nuclei around N = 126 [1]. However , the measurements of many important nuyuancx@mail.sysu.edu.cn clear data are beyond the present experimental access. Theoretical predictions of the unknown data of N = 126 isotones belowPb and nearby nuclei are of crucial signiﬁcance. Some isomers have b een discovered in the region aroundPb [3], but many more are exp ected from shellmodel calculations. On the neutron-r ich side of the s tability line in this region, the 8seniority isomers have been observed up toPb andHg in their respective isotopic chains [4, 5]. The KISS (KEK Isotope Separation System) project aims to measure the properties of the ground and isomeric states in the south region of Pb [6, 7], such as the magnetic moments of the ground and isomeric states ofPt [8]. Reliable descriptions of the known levels and electr omagnetic transition rates are necessary for a model to make new predictio ns in this region. The β-decay properties of long-lived isomers in this region could also be relevant to network calculations in the r -process nucleosynthesis. Also, the stability of N = 126 shell closure in the neutron-rich side attrac ts much interest. In nuclei with extreme proton-neutron ratio, tra ditional proton (neutron) magic numbers may disappear and new ones may emerge, manifesting dynamic shell evolution with isospin. Recent investiga tions revealed a signiﬁcant sd component in both the gro und and excited states inBe [9, 10], indicating the disappearance of the N = 8 s he ll closure in very neutron-rich B e isotope s. The N = 20 shell closure vanishes belowSi, the northern bounda ry of the “island of inversion” [11]. In medium mass nuclei, the Z = 40 sub-shell in neutron-rich Ag isotopes with neutron numbers approaching N = 8 2 are found very fragile [12]. So far, experimental information is scar c e on the s ize of the N = 126 shell gap in the most neutron-rich isotopes with Z ≤ 82. An observation of the excited states inPt supported an unquenched N = 126 gap [13]. Some neutron core-e xcited states are found at excitation energies larger than 2 MeV inPb,Tl, and Hg [14, 15]. At present, it is still challenging to observe neutron core-excited states in N = 126 isotones belowHg. It is necessary to construct a theoretical model, which describes the experimentally available data ofTl andHg precisely, for a reliable predictio n of the evolution of the N = 126 shell gap with decreasing atomic number Z. The nuclear shell model is one of the best models to describe the above structure properties in a uniﬁed way, including binding energies, levels, shell gaps, electromagnetic transition rates, isomers, and β decays. The present work aims to provide a systematic shell-model investigation based on a newly constructed Hamiltonian for the description of spectroscopic properties in the region aroundPb. The properties mentioned above are discussed e xcept for β decays. The ﬁrst forbidden transitions of β decays are of crucial importance for describing the decay half-lives and delayed neutron emissions from heavy nuclei [16, 17]. The pr esent paper is organized as follows: in Sec. I I, a brief description of the construction of the Hamiltonian is given. Section III presents the results of binding energies. The low-lying levels and co re-excited properties, including the evolution of the N = 126 shell gap, are discussed in Secs. IV and V, respectively. Section VI and VII present disc ussions on elec tric quadrupole and magnetic dipole properties , respe c tively. A summary is given in Sec. VIII. TABLE I. Construction of the two-body part of the present Hamiltonian. The present Hamiltonian is constructed in model space with ﬁve proton orbits and thirteen neutron orbits. The ﬁve proton orbits, 0g, 1d, 1d, 2s, and 0h, are named PO5 (5 proton orbits) in the following discussions. The six neutron orbits below the N = 126 shell gap, 0h, 1f, 1f, 2p, 2p, and 0i, are na med NO6 (6 neutron orbits) in the following discussions. The seven neutron orbits above the N = 126 shell gap, 0i, 1g, 1g, 2d, 2d, 3s, and 0j, are named NO7. The present model space does not include the proton orbits above the Z = 82 shell ga p, because many core-excited states ofPb,Tl, and Hg are dominated by one-neutron cor e-excited conﬁguration, as discussed in Sec. V. The s ingle-particle ener gies of the present Ha miltonian are ﬁxed to reproduce the single-particle levels ofPb andTl, the proton separation energy ofPb, and the neutron separation energies of Pb [14, 18]. The Hamiltonian KHHE [19] was constructed in model space consisting of PO5 and NO6. KHHE is included in the pre sent Hamiltonian for the pr oton-proto n interaction inside PO5, the neutron-ne utron interaction inside NO6, and the proton-neutron interaction between PO5 and NO6. KHHE is based on the K uo-Herling hole (KHH) interaction [20, 21]. As suggested in Ref. [22], proton-proton and proton-neutron interactions of KHH are modiﬁed to give mo re precise descriptions of the levels in nuclei aroundPb. The construction of KHHE included such modiﬁcations and further considered modiﬁcations on neutron-neutron interactio n [19]. The Hamiltonian KHPE [23], which is based on KuoHerling particle (KHP) interaction [20, 21], is constructed in model space including six proton orbits beyond Z = 82 and NO7. Recently, KHPE is used to analyze the spin and parity of newly observed nuclideNp [24] and isomeric state ofPa [25]. The neutron-neutron part of KHPE is us e d for the neutron-neutron interaction inside NO7 in the present Hamiltonian. In the present Hamiltonian, the monopole based universal interaction V[26] and the spin-orbit force from M3Y [27](V+LS) a re used for the protonneutron interaction between PO5 and NO7 and the neutron-neutron interaction between NO6 and NO7. The V+LS interaction was examined to be suitable for shell-model calculations in diﬀerent regions, such as the psd region [28], sdpf [29], pf sdg re gion [30], and nuclei to the south-east ofSn [31]. Table I summarizes the construction of the Hamiltonian. Beca use the proton-proton interaction inside PO5 is from KHHE and includes the Coulomb interaction, the calculated binding energies do not need Coulomb correction. In addition, 0.6, 0.4, 0.3, and 0.2 MeV are added to the monopole interaction of each proton orbit, 1d, 1d, 0g, and 0h, respectively. For exa mple, 0.6 MeV is added to two-body matrix elements (TB ME) h1d1d|V| 1d1di with all possible total angular momentum J. Such modiﬁcation provides more precise descriptions of the binding energies of Au and Pt isotopes, which will be discussed in Sec. III . The modiﬁcation rarely aﬀects the spec troscopic prop e rties of Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes, the major objects of the pr esent work, because the monopole eﬀect is canceled in these isotopes when the single-particle energies o f these pr oton orbits are ﬁxed to those ofTl. The present work focuses on the speciﬁc nuclides and states. Most calculations are done for mass number A ≥ 200 except for some special case s. The other nuclei dev iate further from the doubly magic nucleusPb are no t concentrated. For example, there are many experimental data in nuclei around A = 190, but the calculations of these nuclei in full model space are beyond the current computation capability. For core-excited states, only one- ne utron excitation across the N = 126 shell gap is considered, while the mixing between the normal states and the core-exc ited states is not taken into account. One obvious reason is to limit the dimension of the shell-model calc ulation. Another rea son is that the inclusion of such mixing introduces many complicated correlations. For example, if one neutron cr ossing N = 126 shell is considered, the diagonal TBME h(PO 5)(NO7)|V|(PO5)(NO7)i and h(NO6)(NO7)|V|(NO6)(NO7)i should be included. But if the mixing between the normal states and the core-excited states are considered, more oﬀdiagonal TBME h(PO5)(NO6)|V|(PO5)(NO7)i and h(NO6)(NO6)|V|(NO6)(NO7)i should be considered. The properties and strength of the oﬀ-diagonal cross-shell inter action have been rarely studied. It is shown that a weaker oﬀ-diagonal cross-shell interaction can reproduce the low lying properties ofC in a 4~ω ca lculation [32]. But it is more complicated in heavy nuclei because there are orbits with three major shell diﬀerences, such as 0g and 0jorbits. Nuclear ma ss or binding energy is o ne of the most fundamental properties of an atomic nucleus. Ma ny global mass models are available, such as the liquid drop model (LD) [34], ﬁnite-range droplet model [35], the Lublin-Strasbourg Drop model [36], the Hartree -FockBogoliubov model [37, 38], and the Weizs¨acker-Skyrme mass mode l [39, 40]. The overall uncertainties of the global mass models are around 0.5 MeV. The recent version of Weizs¨acker-Skyrme mass model includes the surface diﬀuseness eﬀect for the e xtremely neutron-rich nuclei, where the neutrons may extend very far beyond the core [40]. The investigation on the neutron-halo nucleus, C, shows that its predicted ra dius is strongly aﬀected by the neutron-neutron interaction between the two valence neutrons and the conﬁgurations of theC core [41]. There are some loc al mass models, which predict the unknown mass of a nucleus with high precision from the masses of the nearby nuclei, such as the Garvey-Kelson relations [42] with generalizations [43] and some ne w suggestions [44]. Although the nuclear shell mode l is more often use d to study the spectroscopic properties rather than the bulk properties, it can provide a precise description of masses or binding energies if the Hamiltonian is adequately tuned. Because the shell-model calculations are performed with a c ore, the c alculated binding energy of a speciﬁc nucleus is the sum of the o bserved binding energy of the core and the shell-model binding energy of this nucleus relative to the core. As shown in Ta ble II, the binding energ ie s calculated through the Hamiltonian described in the Sec. II, labeled as B E, are compared with the obser ved data. The 45 experimental binding energies are well reproduced by the shell-model calculations with a roo t mean square (RMS) deviation of only 0.095 MeV. Such a description is much more precise tha n the global mass models and comparable with the local mass models. In general, the nuclei close toPb are mo re precisely reproduced. Based on the present Hamiltonian, some unmeasured binding energies are predicted in Table III for neutron-rich Pb, Tl, Hg, Au, Pt, Ir, Os, Re, and W isotopes. For Ir, Os, Re, and W isotopes, only results of N = 124, 125, 126, and 127 isoto ne s are pr e sented because of the enormous computational cost for other isotones. In g e ne ral, the present Hamilto nian provides similar predictions to those of AME2016, with an RMS deviation of 0.201 MeV. Future mass measurements of these nuclei can further constrain the shell-model Hamiltonian. If the monopo le part of proton-proton intera c tion is not modiﬁed, all binding energie s of nuclei with Z < 80,Au andPt, are overbound compared with the observed data, which are presented in appendix. The eﬀect of the monopole modiﬁcation is not apparent in the calculation of Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes, because all proton orbits ex cept 2sare almost fully occupied in thes e isotopes and their monopole eﬀect on binding energies are canceled when the single-particle energies are ﬁtted to those ofTl. During the constr uc tion of the KHHE interaction, the experimental data of the Au and Pt is otopes were not used for the ﬁt. When the Au and Pt isotopes are considered, the proton holes in other orbits contr ibutes to the binding energies. Thus TABLE II. The comparison between the calculated and observed binding energies (unit in MeV). Experimental data are taken from AME2016 [18]. Root mean square (RMS) deviation between calculations and observations is for all 45 nuclei. TABLE III. The predicted binding energies from the present Hamiltonian and AME2016 [18] (unit in MeV). the monopo le parts of proton 1d, 1d, 0g, and 0horbits are modiﬁed in the present work. The observed and calculated one neutron separation energies (S) are pr e sented in FIG. 1 for Pb, Tl, Hg, Au, Pt, Ir, Os, Re, and W isotopes. The present Hamiltonian almost e xactly reproduces the observed Svalues, including the odd-even sta ggering. The Svalues show strong similarity among nine isotopes both above and below the N = 1 26 shell gap, which indicates that the dominated neutron conﬁgurations are similar among thes e nuclei, as discussed in Sec. IV. Even in the neutron-rich Ir, Os, Re, and W isotopes around N = 126, the predicted Svalues are larger than 2.5 MeV, which means that the neutron drip line is still very far from N = 126 at Z = 74. Based on the excellent p e rformance of the present Hamiltonian on the binding energies and separation energies, it is used to calculate the levels, cross-shell excitations, and electromagnetic properties of nuclei in the south region ofPb in the following discussions. The levels with original proton-proton inter action in KHHE as well as its modiﬁcations mentioned in Ref. [3] are listed in the appendix for comparison. The present Hamiltonian, with the monopole modiﬁcation on all 1d, 1d, 0g, and 0horbits, gives excitation energies in nice agreement with experimental values, including those of both low-lying and core-excited states, a prerequisite that the Hamiltonian can be used to predict isomers and shell closure around N = 126. It is not nec e ssary to discuss all ca lculated levels in the present work. Some states in neutron-rich Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes are discussed in this section, which concentrates on possible isomeric states with small transition energies, such as the 8states inPb, the 21/2and 27/2states inPb, the 13/2and 17/2states inTl. The ha lf-lives of these possible isomeric states will be discussed in Sec. VI. FIG. 1. (Color online) The calculated and observed one neutron separation energies of Pb, Hg, Pt, Os, W (upper panel) and Tl, Au, Ir, Re (lower panel) isotopes. Experimental data are taken from AME2016 [18]. As seen in FIG. 2, all 8states in neutron-rich eveneven Pb isotopes,Pb, are located just above the 6states, leading to the isomerism of these 8states with half-lives o f hundreds of ns or several µs. The 8 states inPb are observed without exact decay energies to the 6states. As dis c ussed in Ref. [4], the energies of the 8to 6transitions inPb are assumed to be between 0.02 and 0.09 MeV, which are drawn 0.05 MeV above the 6states as estimations in FIG. 2. The dominant conﬁguration of 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8inPb is ν(1g), where n is the number of valence neutrons beyond the N = 126 shell gap. The conﬁguration ν(1g)(0i)plays a more important role when the neutron number increases. Because the e nergy diﬀerences E(4) − E(2), E(6) − E(4), and E(8) − E(6) stay almost constant among tributed by the coupling of two ν(1g) neutrons. FIG. 2. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels of The observed 8states inPb are drawn 0.05 MeV above the corresponding 6states as estimations. Dominant conﬁgurations of the 8and 10states and their percentages are indicated. varies when the neutron number increases. The calculations show E(10) inPb are similar to that in Pb a nd much larger than E(8). The results indicate that the 10states are not from the pure ν(1g) conﬁguration but the ν(1g)(0i)conﬁguration. The proton oc cupancies of the ν(1g) orbit are 3.4, 4.8, and 6.1 in the 8states ofPb, respectively. Although many neutrons occupy this orbit, they do not tend to couple to an angular momentum 10. InPb, the 21/2and 27/2states are loc ated just above the 17/2and 23/2states, respectively, which are shown in FIG. 3. Both of them are observed as isomeric states with half-lives of around one hundred ns. The shell-model results predict similar tendency in The ang ular momenta of 17/2and 21/2are mainly from the coupling o f three ν(1g) neutrons, of w hich the maximum angular momentum is 21/2. The angular momenta of 23/2and 27/2are mainly from the ν(1g)(0i)conﬁguration, which can be considered as a ν(0i) neutron coupled to the 8and 6states in the corresponding even Pb isotopes. Both 21/2and 27/2inPb are po ssible isomeric states throug h the present calculations. But the e ne rgy gaps between the 27/2and 23/2states become lar ger fromPb toPb, which leads to shorter half-lives of the 27/2 states. FIG. 3. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels ofPb. Observed data are taken from NNDC [14]. The observed 27/2state inPb is drawn 0.05 MeV above the corresponding 23/2state as an estimation. Dominant conﬁgurations of the 21/2and 27/2states and their percentages are indicated. FIG. 4. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels of Ref. [45]. Dominant conﬁgurations of the 17/2states and their percentages are indicated. As shown in FIG. 4, the 17/2state is located just above the 13/2state and is an is omeric state inTl. The excitation energies are rather constant amongTl. The 17/2and 13/2states in Tl are possible isomeric states. All 9/2, 13/2, and 17/2states are dominated by the same conﬁguration π(2s)ν(1g), which can be considered as a π(2s) proton hole coupled to the 8and 6states in the corresponding Pb isotopes. T he 9/ 2states are above the 7/2states inTl, which decay through both M1 and E2 transitions. Although the 9/2state FIG. 5. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels ofTl. Observed data are taken from NNDC [14]. Dominant conﬁgurations of the 9and 11states and their percentages are indicated. becomes lower than the 7/2state inTl, it is not pr edicted to be an iso meric state because there is a 5/2 state at 0.4 MeV lower. The present structure agrees well with the recent observed 0.58(8) µs iso mer inTl [48], which suggests that the 17/2state is the isomer. Our prediction on the half-life of the 17/2state inTl is 0.66 µs, which will be shown in Sec. VI. Two isomers de-exciting with gamma transitions of 380 and 698 keV, respectively, ar e found inTl [48]. Both the ca lc ulated positive-parity states in Ref. [48] and the present work do not seem to explain these two isomers . The isomer decaying via the 380 keV transition may correspond to the 11/2state with a pro ton 0hhole conﬁguration. The 11/2state is calculated to be just 10 keV above the 9/2state. Because of the uncertainty of calculation, 11/ 2may be actually below the 9/2 state and decay to the 5/2state with decay energy 422 keV. The 698 keV γ line is rather weak and not discussed here. As shown in FIG. 5, the 1 1and 9states inTl are calculated to have high excitation energ ies, and they are dominated by π(0h)ν(0j)conﬁguration. They can decay through E1 or M1 tr ansitions to other states and are not isomeric states. The 9state (not drawn in FIG. 5) with π(0h)ν(0g)conﬁguration is pr e dic ted to be an isomeric state, which is located 95 keV above the 7. Although the 12state with π(0h)ν(0j)conﬁguration is predicted below the 11state, it can decay to the 10states through M2 transition with an estimated half-life around 10 ns. FIG. 6. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels of observed 8states inHg are drawn 0.05 MeV above corresponding 6states as estimations. Dominant conﬁgurations of the 8and 10states ofHg and their percentages are indicated. valence neutrons, the 11and 9states inTl are dominated by π(2s)ν(1g)conﬁguration and located much lower than those inTl. The 11states inTl ar e predicted to be isomeric in the present calculations. A possible high-spin β decaying isomer is suggested to be 11state inTl [4 9], which will be discussed in Sec. VI. The 9states (not drawn in FIG. 5) inTl can decay to 9states and are not predicted to be isomeric. FromHg toHg, the excitation e ne rgies of the 6, 8, and 10states are much reduced, as shown in FIG. 6. Such reduction indicates a transitio n from pro ton excitation to neutron excitation. The conﬁgurations of the 6, 8, and 10states inHg are dominated by two proton hole in the π(0h) orbit. The 10state is observed as an isomeric state above the 8state. But the neutron excitations are dominant in the 6, 8, and 10states inHg, which are similar to tho se ofPb. The 8states ofHg were observed as isomeric states consistent with the present calculatio ns. There are some recent e xpe rimental and theoretical works concerning the spectrosco pic properties close to the N = 126 magic number below Hg isotopes. For example, proton hole states are obs erved inAu,Pt, and Ir [3, 13, 51, 52]. The levels are c ompared with shellmodel calculations with TBME from Ref. [22], where the proton-proton interaction in KHHE is slightly modiﬁed. FIG. 7. (Color online) The calculated and observed levels of Pt,Os,W,Hf,Yb, andEr. Observed data are taken from Ref. [3, 13, 52] The calculated results are with the original proton-proton interaction in KHHE (upper panel) and the present Hamiltonian with the monopole modiﬁcations on the proton-proton interaction (lower panel). It is found that the slight modiﬁcations of proton-proton TBME can provide more precise descriptions of proton hole states inAu andIr [3, 51]. Rec ent obs ervation of the g round state band ofPt shows that it is a transitional nucleus between the lighter Pt isotopes with γ-unstable prope rties and N = 126 nucleusPt with spherical shape [50]. Low-lying states in proton-hole isotopes of Ir, Pt, Au, Hg, and Tl in thePb region, are investigated through nucleon pair approximation, which agrees well with the observed data [53, 54]. The present work concentrates on the levels of neutronrich Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes, especially the possible isomeric states. It can also be use d to investigate levels of other nuclei in this region, s uch as the N = 126 isotones below Hg isotopes. Because the monopole modiﬁcation on the proton-proton interaction has a certain contribution to the levels of N = 126 isoto ne s below Hg isotopes, the results from the original proton-proton interaction in KHHE and the present Hamiltonian are both presented in FIG. 7 for even-even nuclei and in FIG. 8 for odd-even Au,Ir,Re,Ta,Lu, andTm. nuclei. The two calculated re sults show similar desc riptions of the limited obse rved levels in the N = 126 isotones below Hg isotopes except for the observed yrast (5) state ofPt [13], of which the c onﬁguration was suggested to be dominated by the π(2s)(0h)conﬁguration. The present Hamiltonian results in the 5state with the same do minant conﬁguration but the 5state with dominant π(1d)(0h)conﬁguration. The conﬁgurations and excitation ener gies of the yrast states along N = 126 isotones are very sensitive to the monopole interaction related to proton 1dorbit, which changes the gap between 1dand 2sorbits. As proton eﬀective single-particle energies (ESPE) presented in FIG. 9, with the original proton-proton inter action, the 1dorbit becomes more close to the 2sorbit when the proton number decreases fromHg. The yrast 5 state ofPt is thus dominated by π(2s)(0h) conﬁguration. After monopole modiﬁcation, the proton ESPE from the present Hamiltonian shows that the 1dorbit is separated with the 2sorbit fr omHg. The yrast 5state ofPt changes to be dominated by π(1d)(0h)conﬁguration. FIG. 9. (Color online) Eﬀective single-particle energies of ﬁve proton orbits below the Z = 82 shell closures from two Hamiltonians, with the original proton-proton interaction in KHHE (upper panel) and the present Hamiltonian with the monopole modiﬁcations on the proton-proton interaction (lower panel). On the whole, the present Hamiltonian generally predicts a few tens or hundr eds keV lower energies for the excited states in the even-even N = 126 isotones below Hg isotopes. More spectroscopic studies, especially on the experimentally interesting nucleiPt,Os,W, are necessary to constrain the Hamiltonian. For the 1/2states in the odd-even N = 126 iso tones, the present Hamiltonian predicts around 0.5 MeV higher than those with the original proton-proton interaction fromAu toRe. The diﬀerence can also be explained by the larger gap between the pr oton 1dand 2s orbits after monopole modiﬁcation, as shown in FIG. 9 and similar to the discussion on the yrast 5state of Pt. Further observations on the excitation energies of the 1/2states inAu andIr are essential to verify the Hamiltonians. The pr esent Ha miltonian predicts 3/2for the ground states fromRe toTm, which also needs further experimental investigations. The present work provides a possible way of modiﬁcation of Hamiltonian, which is based on the available binding energies of Au and Pt iso- FIG. 10. (Color online) Eﬀective single-particle energies of six (seven) neutron orbits below (beyond) the N = 126 shell closures. topes. More data on binding energ ie s below Pt isotopes and more levels below Hg isotopes will be needed for reliable modiﬁcation of the mono pole terms. Based on the present Hamiltonian, the N = 126 shell gap and neutron cor e-excited states are discussed. Figure 10 presents the neutr on ESPE along N = 126 isotones, which are calculated through the present Hamiltonian with the shell-model occupancies. When the proton number decrease s, the N = 126 gap keeps nearly constant with little quenching, and the relative pos itions of neutron orbits do not change much. Only neutron 1 f and 0iorbits change their orders when proton number changes from 81 to 68. In light and medium mass region, the orders of some orbits dramatically change along isotopic or isotonic chains, leading to the disappearances of some tr aditional magic numbers and appearances of some new magic numb ers. In the present heavy mass region, two pos sible mechanisms may b e responsible for the little variation of the (sub)shell gaps. One reason is that the eﬀective nucleonnucleon inter action is relatively weaker in heavy nuclei because of the larger radius. Thus the eﬀect on the (sub)shell g aps is generally less pronounced when a nucleon is removed or added. The other re ason is the conﬁguration mixing. The protons are ﬁrstly removed from the 2sorbit when proton number changes from 82 to 80. When the proton number is further decreased, protons in 1d, 1d, and 0horbits are almost simultaneously removed. Considering the shell evolution mechanism from the tensor force, j = l + 1/2 and j = l − 1/2 orbits have opposite contributions to ESPE [26, 55, 56]. For example, if 1d and 1dare fully occupied or fully removed, their ten- TABLE IV. The excitation energies of observed and possible corresponding calculated states inPb (unit in MeV). Conﬁgurations of the shell-model wave functions are also shown. The experimental data are taken from Ref. [14]. sor interactions with other orbits are almost canceled and have no c ontributions to shell e volution. It is true that protons in 1dorbit are removed more quickly than those in 1dand 0horbits, the latter two orbits are both j = l + 1/2 type o rbits. However, because of the co nﬁguration mixing, the protons are r emoved from several orbits, which results in a cancella tion of the contributions from the tensor interaction. Based on the experimental data available in In and Ag isotopes, rece nt investigations on the 9/2and 1/2 states inAg [12] andIn [57] show that the evolutions of Z = 40 subshell are rather slow in Ag isotopes towardsSn and in In isotopes towardsSn, respectively. Shell-model calculations can well desc ribe the shell evolution and spectrosc opic pr operties in Ag and In isotopes through V+LS interaction with slight modiﬁcations on the strength of the central force [12, 57]. Besides excitations inside one major shell, the observed neutron core-excited states are also well described by the present Hamiltonian. It is seen in Table IV that the excitation energies of low lying states inPb can be well reproduced by the calculations except for those of the 3, 2, 4, and 6states. FIG. 11. (Color online) The calculated and observed coreexcited states inTl andHg. Observed data are taken from Ref. [14, 15]. TABLE V. The conﬁguration of the core-excited state inTl andHg. Tl 17/2π(0h)ν(2p)(1g)82.4% 35/2π(0h)ν(0i)(0j)100.0% Hg 10π(2s)ν(0i)(1g)41.3% states listed in Table I V are likely to b e dominated by one-neutron cross-shell conﬁgurations beca use all theoretically predicted multiplets correspond to the observed states with similar energy. The RMS deviation between observed data and calculated results is as small as 0.169 MeV. On the other hand, the observed 3, 2, 4, and 6states are likely to be dominated by more complicated conﬁgurations and do not appear in the results of one-neutron cross-shell calculations. Actually, excitation energies of the observed 3, 2, 4, and 6states are well reproduced by those of the calculated 3, 2, 4, and 6states. TABLE VI. The predicted excitation energies of the lowest ﬁve one-neutron cross-shell excited states with diﬀerent spins and parities inAu,Pt,Ir, andOs (unit in MeV). The observed 3state inPb is well known for its collective octupole character with strong conﬁguration mixing [46, 47], which may be the reason that the percentages of dominating conﬁguration in calculated 3and 3 states is smaller than those in other states. The present model space is not large enoug h for the description of the observed 3state. Figure 11 shows that the core-excited states ofTl andHg are well repr oduced by the calculations with one-neutron cross-s he ll excita tion. This indicates tha t the cross-she ll interaction is reasonable up to Z = 80. The 17/2state inTl is also a collective octupole state with π(0h)coupled to the 3state inPb, which is the reason tha t the excitation energy of the calculated state with simple conﬁguration has large discrepancy with the experimental data. Detailed conﬁgurations of these states are listed in Table V. Although the ground state ofTl is dominated by a proton hole in the 2sorbit, many core-excited states have a proton hole in the 0horbit, which contributes to the high angular momenta of these states. Comparing with the shell-model calculations with KHH7B interaction [15], the present res ults give quite similar conﬁgurations for core-excited states (except for the 23/2state) in 23/2state inTl, the present work gives a dominant π(0h)ν(1f)(1g)conﬁguration, while KHH7B interaction gives a strong conﬁgura tion mixing between π(0h)ν(1f)(1g)and π(1d)ν(0i)(1g)conﬁgurations [15]. Contrary toTl, the angular momenta of obse rved core-excited states inHg are mostly originated from the coupling of neutr ons. Two proton holes in the 2s orbit are dominant proton c onﬁguration and have no contribution to the angular momenta of these states. Besides the core-excited states in nuclei discussed above,Pb, Tl, a ndHg, the 1/ 2state inPb is well reproduced by a state with 65.6% ν(2p)(1g), 18.5% ν(2p)(0i), and, 9.6% ν(2p)(0i)conﬁgurations. The observed and calculated excitatio n energies are 2.149 and 2.219 MeV, re spe ctively. Some predictions are shown in Table VI for the excitation energies of the ﬁve lowest one-neutron cr oss-shell excited states with diﬀere nt spins and parities inAu, Pt,Ir, andOs. The spin-parity of the calculated lowest states are quite similar b etweenPt and Os and betweenAu andIr, respectively. But it becomes mo re diﬃcult to ﬁnd such cross-shell excited states when the proton number decreases. With more proton-holes, normal states without cro ss-shell excitations are more easy to have diﬀerent spins and parities , while c ross-she ll excited s tates have fewer probabilities of being observed as yrast states. Generally speaking, eﬀective charges ar e larger with a heavier core in shell-model calculations, because a heavier core normally has stronger core pola rization effect. For example, proton (neutron) eﬀective charges are around 1.25 (0.25) for psd shell calculations withHe core [28], and 1.7 (0.7) for nuclei aroundSn [31]. However, for nuclei aroundPb, there are few investigations, especially systematic investig ation, on the values of eﬀective charges. In the present study, 26 quadrupole moments and 6 B(E2) values in Pb and Hg iso topes are considered to investigate the values of eﬀective charges. If proton and neutron eﬀective charges eand eare constra ine d as e= 1 + e, their values are 1.80 and 0.80 from ﬁtting to the 32 observed data. If the ﬁtting is free without any constraints, eand eare 1.58 and 0.85, respectively. The values of eﬀective charges obtained with e= 1 + e relationship are a little larger for the presentPb region compared with those for theSn region. The two sets of the eﬀective charges obtained do not give large diﬀerence in the results for the 32 observed E2 properties. The detailed results for the quadrupole moments and B(E2) values are presented in Table VII. Almost all observed data are well reproduced by the shell-model transition matrix elements with the present two sets of eﬀective charges. Although the calcula tions give the opposite sign for the quadrupole moments of the ground state ofPb and the 2state inPb, the absolute deviations from the ex perimenta l data are no t large. The observed quadrupole moment of the ground state (3/2) ofHg is +0.387(6) b. Shell-model calculations fail to reproduce the 3/2state to be the ground state FIG. 12. (Color online) The calculated and observed half-lives corresponding to E2 transitions. The calculated results are based on shell-model transition rates and observed transition energies. Observed data are taken from NNDC [14]. and give three very close 3/2states with excitation energies (quadrupole moments) 0.109 MeV (-0.09 b), 0.168 MeV (0.1 1 b), and 0.46 2 MeV (0.25 b), respectively. It seems that the third 3/2state is more likely to be the observed ground state bec ause of its quadrupole moment. The magnetic mo ment of this 3 /2state will be discusse d in the Sec. VII. Some observed E2 transition data are presented by half-lives instead of transition streng ths. Because of uncertainties of the half-lives, they are not use d to deduce the B(E2) values and to ﬁt eﬀective charges. Some half-lives of nuclei in this region are calculated by shellmodel transition rates and observed transition energie s. It should be noted that electro n conversion coeﬃcients need to be considered when transition energies ar e small. The co rresponding electron conversion coeﬃcients are calculated by BrIcc code from ANU [60]. It is seen in FIG. 12 that the half-lives are well reproduced, w hich means that the shell model provides reasonable transition rates. The only exception is the halflife ofPb, of which the observed data is more than 20 times longer than the calculation. In other words, the corres ponding transition rate is aro und 20 times overestimated. As shown in Table VII , the B(E2;0→ 2) value and the quadrupole moments of the 4state inPb are reasonably reproduced. The B(E2;2→ 4) value seems unexp ectedly overestimated by the shell-model calculation. But one should note that the absolute B(E2;2→ 4) value evaluated from the half-life is only 0.52 efm, which is rather small and diﬃcult to be exactly described. The calculated half-lives discussed here, with eﬀective charges e= 1.58 and e= 0.85, show better agreement with the observed o nes than those with e= 1.80 and e= 0.80. Based on the reliable agreement between the obs e rved and calculated E2 properties, some possible isomeric states, which decay through E2 transition with small decay energies, are presented in Table VIII with TABLE VII. The calculated and observed electric quadrupole moments Q (for the ﬁrst 26 rows) or reduced transition strength B(E2) (for the last 6 rows). Observed data are taken from Ref. [59]. M elements, respectively. SM1 and SM2 are shell-model calculations with two sets of eﬀective charges, e e= 1.80, e= 0.80, respectively. The units for E, Q, B(E2), and M are keV, eb, ep calculated from Q and(B(E2)). TABLE VIII. The prediction of possible isomers including transition energy (δE), B(E2), and half-lives. nuclide JJδE (MeV) B(E2)(efm) half-life (µs) Pb 17/213/2 21/217/2 Pb 17/213/2 21/217/2 Tl 13/29/2 17/213/2 Tl 13/29/2 17/213/2 Hg 17/213/2 21/217/2 and Mare proton and neutron E2 transition matrix or B(E2)Qor B(E2)Qor B(E2) TABLE IX. The estimation of unknown transition energies (δE) of isomeric states through observed half-lives and calculated B(E2). Observed half-lives are taken from NNDC [14]. Pb 27/223/2 Tl 17/213/2 Pt 19/215/2 eﬀective charges e= 1.58 and e= 0.85. The half-lives range from several ns to several µs. Two isomeric states with rather long half-lives are predicted for 17/2and 13/2states inTl. The 17/2, 1 3/2, and 9/2states inTl are dominated by similar conﬁgurations, π(2s)ν(1g)and 17/2→ 13/2and 13/2→ 9/ 2, the one b ody transition densities involving ν(1g) and ν(0i) orbits are not lar ge a nd greatly canceled by other components, which leads to small transition matrix elements. The experimental data ofTl ar e rather limited [48], and these two predicted isomers are not found in a recent experiment. The predicted half-life of the 17/2state inTl agrees quite well with the recently observed 0.58(8) µs isomer [48]. Ref. [48] also suggested this isomer to be a 17/2state. Ev ide nc e was shown for a high-spin β decaying isomer inTl [49]. The prese nt calculation gives a 0 .052 µs half-life for the 11state, which is much smaller than the lower limit value of 3 µs of the β decaying isomer [49]. If the 11state is assumed to be a candidate for the β decaying isomer, there are two possibilities. One possibility is that the decay energy from 11to 9is very small. Fo r example, the half-life is estimated to be 2.5 µs when decay energy is 1 .7 keV. Another possibility is that the 11state is located below the 9state and decays to other states with lower spins. Based on the observed half-lives and calculated E2 properties, it is possible to estimate unknown transition energies of some isomeric states in the south region of Pb, such as tra nsitions from 8to 6inPb and Hg [14]. The estimated e ne rgies are rather small, which are listed in Table IX. The observed half-lives are given with fair uncertainties, which induce around 0 .01 MeV uncertainties on the decay energies. The transition energies inPb are assumed to be between 0.02 and 0.09 Me V [4], which are slightly sma lle r than the present estimations. T he present estima tions provide reasonable information for future studies. Similar to the investigations on the eﬀective charges, eﬀective g factors are investigated based on 44 magnetic moments in this region. The M1 operator used in the present work includes six terms [58], where−→l ,−→s , and Y⊗−→s are the a ngular momentum, spin, and tensor terms of the oper ator, respectively, and g, g, and gare corresponding proton and neutron g facto rs. Fo r each term of the operator, the nuclear matrix element is calculated from the single-particle matrix element through the single-particle basis and the one body transition density through the calculated shellmodel wave functions. The magnetic moment is calcu- FIG. 13. (Color online) The comparison between calculated and observed magnetic moments. Observed data are taken from Ref. [64]. lated through, where l, s, and tare the proton and neutron angular momentum, spin, and tensor terms of nuclear matrix elements, respectively. Because shell-model calculations are perfo rmed in the truncated mo de l space , eﬀective g factors should be used instead of the free ones. In Table X, six sets of eﬀective g factors are presented, which are ﬁtted to the 44 magnetic moments lis ted in Table XI with the shell-model nuclear matrix elements. Set1 (Set3) of g facto rs is ﬁtted to all 44 magnetic moments without (with) considering the g terms. Also without considering the gterms, Set4 of g factor s is ﬁtted separately to the 7 magnetic moments in nuclei with N ≥ 1 26 and the 37 magnetic moments in nuclei with N < 126. Set2 (Set5) of g factors is ﬁtted to the same data set as for Set1 (Set4) by considering the gterms while the gand gterms are kept the same as those in Set1 (Set4). Set6 is ﬁtted similarly as TABLE X. Six sets of eﬀective g factors (unit in µ) with RMS deviations between observed and calculated magnetic moments of 44 states of nuclei in the south region ofPb. RMS deviation from free g factors is also presented for comparison. Set1 (Set3) is ﬁtted to all 44 magnetic moments without (with) considering the g Set4 is ﬁtted separately to 7 states in nuclei with N ≥ 126 and 37 states in nuclei with N < 126. Set2 (Set5) is ﬁtted to the same data set as Set1 (Set4) with considering the gterms while the g Set6 is ﬁtted in a similar way as ﬁtting Set4 but without consideration of g indicated in parentheses. for Set4 but without considering the gterm. RMS deviations between the observed and calculated magnetic moments are also listed in Table X with the free g factors a nd the six sets of eﬀective g factors for comparison. Comparing with the results with free g facto rs, all results from the six sets of eﬀective g factors much reduce the RMS deviations, which indicate strong core polarization eﬀects on the g factors. Any set of the eﬀective g factors shown in Table XI successfully reproduces the experimentally observed 4 4 magnetic moments. It is rea sonable to use them for further investigations on other magnetic moments and M1 transitions. The magnetic moments are generally sensitive to the single-particle conﬁgur ations. The nice agreements between observed and calculated magnetic moments show that the present Hamiltonian reasonably accounts for the dominant conﬁgurations of considered states in Table XI. As see n in Table X and Table XI, total RMS dev iation and deviations between observed and calculated magnetic moments in N ≥ 126 nuclei are much reduced if separate sets of eﬀective g factors are used for magnetic moments with N ≥ 12 6 and N < 126. The calculated magnetic moments with the eﬀective g factors obtained from global ﬁtting, Set1, Set2 , and Se t3, have certain deviations from the observations for the neutr on-rich nuclei with N ≥ 126, such asPb andTl shown worthwhile in Table XI. If the eﬀective g factors are separately ﬁtted for N ≥ 126 and N < 126 nuclei, the results from Set4, Set5, and Set6 almost exac tly reproduce the seven observed magnetic moments ofPb, Tl, andHg. Figure 13 presents a comparison between calc ulated results and observed data. The contribution of the gterm is so small that the Set1 results are similar to those of Set3 with the gterms. After the separate consideration of N ≥ 126 and N < 126 nuclei, the results with Set5 give a better agree ment with the data compar ed with tho se of Set2. It is worthwhile to discuss the values of eﬀective g factors to understand the origin of the diﬀerence. In general, free gfactors should be quenched to re produce the observed magnetic moments because of the core polarization eﬀect. For the present results, quenching with factors of 64 −68% and 56 −64% are found for gand g, respectively, which show stronger quenching comparing with those around 70% in the fpg-shell region [61], and around 90% in the sd-shell region [58] and psd-shell region [28]. It is reasonable that a larger core corresponds to a stronger core polarization eﬀect and quenching. All six sets of the eﬀective g factors show a positive δg, deﬁned as g= g+ δg, which is reasonable due to the meson exchange processes [62, 63]. A negative δg, deﬁned as g= g+δg, is found with large uncertainty in the set of the eﬀective g factors ﬁtted to the magnetic mo ments with N ≥ 126. The other sets of the eﬀective g factors give a po sitive but tiny δg except for Set6, which uses free g. For the ma gnetic moments with N < 126 , a negative δgincreases the RMS deviation dramatically. If δg= −0.05 is used for magnetic moments w ith N < 126 in Set4, the total RMS deviation increases from 0.13 to 0.41. Even if we use a free g(g= 0), the present data is successfully reproduced and the RMS deviation is reasonably small. If g= 0 is used in Set4 and other eﬀective g factors are reﬁtted, as shown for Set6 in Table X, the RMS deviation increases little from 0.12 to 0.13. In addition, all other eﬀective g factors change little exc e pt TABLE XI. The calculated and observed 44 magnetic moments used in ﬁtting. Observed data are taken from Ref. [64]. L (L), S(S), and t(t) are the proton (neutron) orbital angular momentum, spin, and tensor part of the nuclear matrix elements, respectively. Set1, Set2, Set3, Set4, and Set5 are shell model calculations with six sets of eﬀective g factors listed in Table X. The unit for magnetic moments is µ. N ≥ 126 N < 126 for the gfactor for N ≥ 126 nuclei: gchanges from -2.393(0.608) µto -3.001(0.020) µ, which is much different from that used for N < 126 nuclei. The diﬀerent eﬀective gterm for N ≥ 126 and N < 126 nuclei is the main r e ason that the RMS deviation is much reduced when the two situatio ns are separately considered. The contribution of the tensor term to the magnetic moments is rarely discussed. In the sd-she ll region, the inclusion of the tensor terms changes little the total RMS deviation between observed and calculated magnetic moments and M1 transitions [58]. The present work shows similar results that the inclusion of the tensor terms change the RMS deviation little, as seen from Table X. The RMS deviations are close to ea ch o ther among Set1, Set2, and Set3, and between Set4 and Se t5. After separ ately considering the N ≥ 126 and N < 12 6 nuclei, results are presented with free ﬁtting of the g and gterms (Set4), with ﬁtting of the gterms when the gand gterm are ﬁxed as Set4 (Set5), and with ﬁtting of the gand gterms when the gterm is constrained to be zero (Set6). The results of free ﬁtting of all the g, g, and gterms are not presented, because there are only seven nuclei with N ≥ 126, too few to ﬁt six eﬀective g fa ctors. For N < 126 nuclei, the free ﬁtting of all the g, g, and gterms results in g= −1.083(0.208) and g= −0.789(0.147), which are quite diﬀerent from those in the six sets and largely quenched from the free values, while the other four factors are not much diﬀerent from those in the six sets. It see ms the g term s ubstitutes partial eﬀect of gterm. Similar but less pronounced eﬀects ar e found in Set3 and in sd-shell region in Ref. [58]. It demands further and systematic investigations on the relationship between the gand gterms. For the 3/2state inHg, unlike its q uadrupole moment, the ﬁrst calculated 3 /2state gives the closest value of ma gnetic moment to the observed one, while the second and third calculated 3/2states have both positive magnetic moments. Considering that the quadrupole moment of the third calculated 3/ 2state mostly agrees with the experimenta l data, it is diﬃcult to identify which calculated state corresponds to the observed ground state. Actually, conﬁguration mixing is quite strong for the three calc ulated 3/2states, where the percentage of the largest co mpone nt in these three states is less than 7%. Some o ther experimental data on mag ne tic moments are available in this region in nuclei with A ≥ 200. They are not discussed in Table XI but listed in Table XII. Some of these magnetic moments have no exact experimental values, such as the 2states ofPb, or uncertainties on spins, such a s the (5)state ofTl and the (7)state ofTl, or large uncertainty in observed value, such as 5/2state ofTl, or large deviation between observed and calculated values, such as the 4 states ofPb, the 23/2state ofPb, and the 3/2state ofTl. For magnetic moments of the 2states ofPb, the (5)state ofTl, the (7)state ofTl, and the 5/2state ofTl, the present calculations provide rea sonable results, which are not further discussed because of the lack of experimental information. As shown in Table XII, the calculated magnetic moments of the second corres ponding states with the same spins and parities provide more re asonable descr iptions of those of the 4 states ofPb, the 23/2state ofPb, and the 3/2state ofTl. The corresponding yrare states locate not much higher than these yrast states. It is possible that the calculations do not reproduce the order of the yrast and yrare states because of the theoretica l uncertainties. The magnetic moment of the 3state inPb is +1.9(2) µ[64], which is far from the calculated value, which is around -0.8 µ. Such devia tion indicates that the present model space is not large enoug h for this 3 state, which is considered to be a sur face vibr ation state with octupole type [46, 47] and needs to be describe d in a much larger model space. In general, it is diﬃcult fo r the shell model to describe such octupole states, as discussed in Sec. V. Based on the s ix sets of the eﬀective g factors, magnetic moments of some neutron-rich Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes are predicted in Table XII I. Bec ause the nuclei in Table XIII are all with N > 126, magnetic moments predicted with Set4, Set5, and Set6 are preferentially recommended. The values of magnetic moments of the ground states, 9/2, ofPb andHg are quite similar to each other, which are dominated by a single 1gneutron conﬁguratio n. The ν(1g), π(2s), and π(2s)ν(1g)conﬁgurations contribute dominantly to the mag ne tic moments of the 8excited states ofPb, the 1/2ground states ofTl, and the 5ground states of In summary, systematic shell-model investigations are performed for the south region ofPb. The model space includes ﬁve proto n orbits and thirteen neutron orbits. The two-body matrix elements (TBME) are partly taken from the existing KHHE and KHPE Hamiltonians and partly calculated through the monopole based universal inter action Vplus spin-orbit interaction. The newly constructed Hamiltonian can well reproduce binding energies, levels (including those of neutron cor e-excited states and isomeric states), electric and mag ne tic properties. Based on the reasonable description of known properties, the present Hamiltonian predicts some unknown binding energies in nuclei around N = 126 and po ssible isomeric states in neutron-rich Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes. The N = 126 shell closure is predicted to be kept unchanged from Z = 82 to 68 with minor reduction of the gap. We adopted the eﬀective charges e= 1.5 8 and e= 0.85 for this mass region through the systema tic investigations on 32 electric quadrupole properties. For magnetic dipo le properties, it is recommended to use diﬀerent sets of the eﬀective g factors to calculate the magnetic moments of the N ≥ 1 26 and N < 126 nuclei, while the reason is also clariﬁed. If the tensor terms of the M1 operator are not taken into account as many investigations, eﬀective g factors, Set4 and Set6 in Table X (each includes two sets for the N ≥ 126 and N < 126 nuclei, respectively), show reasonable agree ment with the TABLE XII. The same as Table XI, but for magnetic moments with observed data not used in ﬁtting. The results of both the ﬁrst and second calculated states are presented for the corresponding states in experimental values through the present studies on 44 magnetic moments. Recently, ma ny β-decay properties were measured in neutron-rich Au, Hg, Tl, Pb, and Bi isotopes, including dec ay half-lives, β delayed γ transitions, and neutron emissions [65–67]. It is exp ected that the present Hamiltonian can be used to investigate these β- de c ay properties, especially for nuclei around N = 126 shell closure. As discussed in previous works, the ﬁrst-forbidden transitions in β decay are signiﬁcant in the south of Pb [16, 17]. A systematic study based on the present Hamiltonian would be helpful for investigations on the r process, including both Gamow-Teller and ﬁrst-forbidden transitions. This work has been supported by the National Natural Science Founda tion of China under Grant Nos. 11775316, 11961141004, 11675225, 11635003, and 11735017, the National Key R&D Program of China (Contract No.2018YFA0404402), the Tip-top Scientiﬁc and Technical Innovative Yo uth Talents of Guangdong special support progr am under Grant No. 2016TQ03N575, the National Key Rese arch and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2018YFB1900405, the computational resources from SYSU and National Superco mputer Center in Guangzhou, and STFC(UK). NS and TO acknowledges acknowledge the support from MEXT as ”Prior ity Issue on po st-K computer” (Elucidation of the Fundamental Laws a nd Evolution of the Universe). The calculated binding energies are lis ted in the appendix for Hg, Au, Pt, Ir, Os, Re, and W isotopes based on three Hamiltonians, as shown in Tables XIV and XV. Besides the present results BE, results from two Ha milto nians, BEand BE, with the same proton-neutron and neutron-neutron parts are also presented to show the eﬀect of the modiﬁcation of the proton-pro ton interaction. BEand BE are calculated with the proton-proton inter action from the original KHHE and the modiﬁed one mentioned in Ref. [3] (Ste11 means Steer et al., 2011), res pectively. The modiﬁcations in Ref. [3] aimed to give better descriptions on the proton-hole states ofAu andIr. As described in Sec. II, BEare c alculated with the proton-proton interaction from KHHE with 0.6, 0.4, 0.3, and 0.2 MeV added to monop ole interactions of 1d, 1d, 0g, and 0horbits, respectively. Because only the proton-proton interaction is diﬀerent among these three Hamiltonians and the single-particle energies ofTl are ﬁxed to the observed data, all these Hamiltonians give the same results for Pb and Tl isotopes, which are already presented in Table II. BEare in good agreement with the 16 observed binding energies of Hg, Au, and Pt isotopes taken from AME2016 [18]. If the monopole interac tion is not enlarged, binding energies ofAu andPt are overbound as in the BEand BEresults compared with the observed data. It is also found that without monopo le modiﬁcation, BEand BE [1] M.R. Mumpower, R. Surman, G.C. McLaughlin, and A. Aprahamian, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 86, 86 (2016). [2] T. Kajino and G.J. Mathews, Rep. Prog. Phys. 80, 084901 (2017). [3] S.J. Steer, Zs. Podoly´ak, S. Pietri, M.G´orska, H. Grawe, K.H. Maier, P.H. Regan, D. Rudolph, A.B. Garnsworthy, R. Hoischen, J. Gerl, H.J. Wollersheim, F. Becker, P. Bednarczyk, L. C´aceres, P. Doornenbal, H. Geissel, J. Gr¸ebosz, A. Kelic, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, F. Montes, W. Prokopwicz, T. Saito, H. Schaﬀner, S. Tashenov, A. Heinz, M. Pf¨utzner, T. Kurtukian-Nieto, G. Benzoni, A. Jungclaus, D.L. Balabanski, M. Bowry, C. Brandau, A. Brown, A.M. Bruce, W.N. Catford, I.J. Cullen, Zs. Dombr´adi, M.E. Estevez, W. Gelletly, G. Ilie, J. Jolie, G.A. Jones, M. Kmiecik, F.G. Kondev, R. Kr¨ucken, S. Lalkovski, Z. Liu, A. Maj, S. Myalski, S. Schwertel, T. Shizuma, P. M. Walker, E. Werner-Malento, and O. Wieland, Phys Rev. C 84, 044313 (2011). [4] A. Gottardo, J.J. Valiente-Dob´on, G. Benzoni, R. Nicolini, A. Gadea, S. Lunardi, P. Boutachkov, A.M. Bruce, M.G´orska, J. Grebosz, S. Pietri, Zs. Podoly´ak, M. Pf¨utzner, P.H. Regan, H. Weick, J. Alc´antara N´u˜nez, A. Algora, N. Al-Dahan, G. de Angelis, Y. Ayyad, N. Alkhomashi, P.R.P. Allegro, D. Bazzacco, J. Benlliure, M. Bowry, A. Bracco, M. Bunce, F. Camera, E. Casarejos, M.L. Cortes, F.C.L. Crespi, A. Corsi, A.M. Denis Bacelar, A.Y. Deo, C. Domingo-Pardo, M. Doncel, Zs. Dombradi, T. Engert, K. Eppinger, G.F. Farrelly, F. Farinon, E. Farnea, H. Geissel, J. Gerl, N. Goel, E. Gregor, T. Habermann, R. Hoischen, R. Janik, S. Klupp, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, S.M. Lenzi, S. Leoni, S. Mandal, R. Menegazzo, D. Mengoni, B. Million, A.I. Morales, D.R. Napoli, F. Naqvi, C. Nociforo, A. Prochazka, W. Prokopowicz, F. Recchia, R.V. Ribas, M.W. Reed, D. Rudolph, E. Sahin, H. Schaﬀner, A. Sharma, B. Sitar, D. Siwal, K. Steiger, P. Strmen, T.P.D. Swan, I. Szarka, C.A. Ur, P.M. Walker, O. Wieland, H-J. Wollersheim, F. Nowacki, E. Maglione, and A.P. Zuker, Phys. Rev. Lett. generally present overbound results compared with those predicted by AME2016, especially when proton number becomes smaller. Beca use BEand BEoverestimate the observed binding energies of Au and Pt isotopes, it is reasonable to assume that they also overestimate the unmeasured ones. BEgive more reasonable predictions compared with those in AME2016. As shown in Tables from XVI to XXIII, the calculated excitation energies of the lowest 25 yrast states are also listed for Pb, Tl, and Hg isotopes, and N = 126 isotones belowHg. The calculations are performed through the same three Hamiltonians. As discussed before, the diﬀerent proton-proton interaction does not aﬀect the calculated le vels of Pb and Tl isotopes. Only one theoretical result is shown for the levels of Pb and Tl isotopes. For Hg isotopes and N = 126 isotones belowHg, re sults are presented with the original proton-proton inter action in KHHE (E), its modiﬁcations mentioned in Ref. [3] (E), and the present Hamilto nian with monopole modiﬁcations on proton-proton interaction (E). 109, 162502 (2012). [5] A. Gottardo, J.J. Valiente-Dob´on, G. Benzoni, A. Gadea, S. Lunardi, P. Boutachkov, A.M. Bruce, M. G´orska, J. Grebosz, S. Pietri, Zs. Podoly´ak, M. Pf¨utzner, P.H. Regan, H. Weick, J. Alc´antara N´u˜nez, A. Algora, N. AlDahan, G. de Angelis, Y. Ayyad, N. Alkhomashi, P.R.P. Allegro, D. Bazzacco, J. Benlliure, M. Bowry, A. Bracco, M. Bunce, F. Camera, E. Casarejos, M.L. Cortes, F.C.L. Crespi, A. Corsi, A.M. Denis Bacelar, A.Y. Deo, C. Domingo-Pardo, M. Doncel, Zs. Dombradi, T. Engert, K. Eppinger, G.F. Farrelly, F. Farinon, E. Farnea, H. Geissel, J. Gerl, N. Goel, E. Gregor, T. Habermann, R. Hoischen, R. Janik, P.R. John, S. Klupp, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, S.M. Lenzi, S. Leoni, S. Mandal, R. Menegazzo, D. Mengoni, B. Million, V. Modamio, A.I. Morales, D.R. Napoli, F. Naqvi, R. Nicolini, C. Nociforo, A. Prochazka, W. Prokopowicz, F. Recchia, R.V. Ribas, M.W. Reed, D. Rudolph, E. Sahin, H. Schaﬀner, A. Sharma, B. Sitar, D. Siwal, K. Steiger, P. Strmen, T.P.D. Swan, I. Szarka, C.A. Ur, P.M. Walker, O. Wieland, H.-J. Wollersheim, Phys. Lett. B 725, 292 (2013). [6] H. Miyatake, M. Wada, X.Y. Watanabe, Y. Hirayama, P. Schury, M. Ahmed, H. Ishiyama, S.C. Jeong, Y. Kakiguchi, S. Kimura, J.Y. Moon, M. Mukai, M. Oyaizu, and J.H. Park, AIP Conf. Proc. 1947, 020018 (2018). [7] Y.X. Watanabe, Y.H. Kim, S.C. Jeong, Y. Hirayama, N. Imai, H. Ishiyama, H.S. Jung, H. Miyatake, S. Choi, J.S. Song, E. Clement, G. de France, A. Navin, M. Rejmund, C. Schmitt, G. Pollarolo, L. Corradi, E. Fioretto, D. Montanari, M. Niikura, D. Suzuki, H. Nishibata, and J. Takatsu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 172503 (2015). [8] Y. Hirayama, M. Mukai, Y.X. Watanabe, M. Ahmed, S.C. Jeong, H.S. Jung, Y. Kakiguchi, S. Kanaya, S. Kimura, J. Y. Moon, T. Nakatsukasa, M. Oyaizu, J.H. Park, P. Schury, A. Taniguchi, M. Wada, K. Washiyama, H. Watanabe, and H. Miyatake, Phys. Rev. C 96, 014307 (2017). [9] J. Chen, J.L. Lou, Y.L. Ye, Z.H. Li, D.Y. Pang, C.X. TABLE XIV. The comparison between the calculated and observed binding energies (unit in MeV). Experimental data are taken from AME2016 [18]. TABLE XV. The comparison between the calculated binding energies and binding energies predicted in AME2016 [18] (unit in MeV). 41.74 10 103.66 103.66 10 22.64 11 9/20.00 9/20.00 9/20.00 9/20.00 9/2 11/20.74 11/20.74 11/20.74 7/20.37 7/2 7/21.07 7/21.10 7/21.02 11/20.56 11/2 13/21.25 13/21.27 13/21.20 5/20.73 5/2 15/21.36 15/21.36 5/21.35 13/20.75 13/2 5/21.43 5/21.44 15/21.35 3/20.89 3/2 15/21.94 15/21.96 17/21.86 17/21.13 17/2 17/21.96 17/21.97 13/21.86 15/21.16 15/2 13/21.96 13/21.97 15/21.88 21/21.25 21/2 11/21.99 11/21.99 11/21.89 15/21.26 15/2 9/22.04 9/22.04 9/21.94 27/21.59 27/2 7/22.09 7/22.08 7/21.99 19/21.66 19/2 19/22.13 19/22.13 19/22.03 23/21.77 23/2 5/22.21 5/22.20 5/22.12 25/21.82 25/2 21/22.29 3/22.27 21/22.19 13/21.82 13/2 3/22.29 1/22.33 3/22.20 1/21.85 1/2 1/22.33 21/22.39 3/22.45 17/21.92 17/2 3/22.45 3/22.45 23/22.49 11/21.96 11/2 23/22.59 1/22.69 1/22.50 9/21.98 9/2 1/22.69 23/22.72 1/22.60 7/22.01 7/2 17/22.73 17/22.72 17/22.65 5/22.03 5/2 19/23.36 19/23.37 19/23.27 3/22.10 19/2 21/23.38 21/23.37 23/23.28 19/22.10 3/2 23/23.38 23/23.38 21/23.31 1/22.15 1/2 25/23.40 25/23.39 25/23.33 21/22.23 21/2 1.74 101.74 2.64 112.45 112.41 2.67 112.55 122.51 2.74 122.66 2.81 102.71 132.72 132.71 2.89 132.74 0.00 9/20.00 9/20.00 9/20.00 9/20.00 0.38 7/20.37 7/20.38 7/20.39 7/20.38 0.57 11/20.56 11/20.48 11/20.49 11/20.48 0.73 5/20.72 5/20.70 5/20.70 5/20.69 0.75 13/20.75 13/20.73 13/20.74 13/20.72 0.89 3/20.89 3/21.05 3/21.05 3/21.05 1.13 17/21.12 15/21.09 15/21.10 15/21.09 1.16 15/21.16 15/21.19 15/21.20 15/21.19 1.25 21/21.24 1/21.22 1/21.23 1/21.22 1.26 15/21.26 17/21.25 17/21.25 17/21.25 1.60 27/21.59 21/21.38 21/21.38 21/21.38 1.66 19/21.66 23/21.53 23/21.53 23/21.52 1.77 23/21.76 19/21.56 19/21.56 19/21.55 1.82 25/21.81 13/21.69 13/21.70 13/21.69 1.83 13/21.82 17/21.76 25/21.77 17/21.75 1.86 17/21.82 25/21.76 27/21.77 25/21.76 1.92 1/21.84 27/21.77 17/21.78 27/21.77 1.96 11/21.87 11/21.92 11/21.92 11/21.85 1.98 9/21.88 7/21.95 7/21.94 7/21.86 2.01 7/21.92 9/21.95 9/21.95 9/21.86 2.04 5/22.00 19/21.97 19/21.98 5/21.90 2.10 19/22.00 5/21.99 5/21.98 19/21.94 2.10 3/22.07 3/22.04 3/22.04 3/21.97 2.16 21/22.14 1/22.12 1/22.13 1/22.12 2.33 1/22.15 21/22.22 21/22.31 21/22.12 62.69 10 103.04 103.02 102.97 10 23.22 10 113.56 113.68 11 73.43 11 123.77 124.08 103.45 103.44 12 103.96 104.09 123.46 123.50 11 114.75 114.76 113.89 11 134.84 134.77 144.03 134.26 14 62.12 10 32.30 10 62.32 10 82.41 10 103.28 123.30 123.36 123.28 12 123.40 113.48 103.38 113.47 10 113.40 103.55 113.49 11 113.66 113.62 113.58 10 03.70 133.78 113.75 133.78 11 3/20.00 3/20.00 3/20.00 3/20.00 3/20.00 3/2 1/20.24 1/20.27 1/20.65 1/20.24 1/20.26 5/2 5/20.83 5/20.93 5/20.90 5/20.52 11/20.68 11/2 11/20.92 11/20.95 11/20.97 11/20.62 5/20.79 1/2 7/21.66 7/21.69 7/21.63 7/21.16 7/21.41 7/2 7/21.68 9/21.85 7/21.67 9/21.22 7/21.46 9/2 13/21.77 7/21.87 13/21.70 13/21.42 9/21.49 3/2 15/21.79 13/21.90 15/21.81 15/21.51 13/21.50 13/2 9/21.86 15/22.02 9/21.85 9/21.52 9/21.51 9/2 9/21.95 9/22.12 9/21.91 7/21.56 15/21.59 5/2 19/22.86 19/22.86 5/22.80 3/21.87 3/22.16 15/2 5/22.87 15/22.91 3/22.88 5/21.98 5/22.23 7/2 11/22.89 3/22.94 19/22.98 11/22.05 11/22.40 19/2 15/22.91 11/22.94 11/23.01 19/22.12 19/22.43 17/2 3/22.94 5/23.00 15/23.03 17/22.23 15/22.49 11/2 23/23.05 13/23.21 19/23.14 23/22.36 23/22.53 23/2 19/23.19 17/23.23 17/23.15 19/22.42 19/22.54 19/2 13/23.22 23/23.28 23/23.17 15/22.48 13/22.54 15/2 17/23.22 21/23.30 13/23.34 13/22.49 17/22.58 13/2 17/23.31 19/23.31 17/23.43 17/22.58 17/22.58 17/2 21/23.47 17/23.31 21/23.59 21/22.70 21/22.66 21/2 21/24.47 21/24.47 21/24.67 1/22.87 1/22.98 1/2 23/24.49 23/24.48 23/25.00 21/23.34 25/23.53 21/2 27/24.54 27/24.54 27/25.07 25/23.36 21/23.63 25/2 25/25.04 25/25.04 1/25.16 23/23.62 23/23.64 27/2 5/20.00 11/20.00 3/20.00 5/20.00 11/20.00 3/2 3/20.12 5/20.01 5/20.17 11/20.12 5/20.07 11/2 11/20.16 1/20.08 11/20.19 3/20.31 1/20.15 5/2 1/20.27 3/20.12 1/20.71 1/20.40 3/20.34 1/2 9/21.00 9/20.90 7/20.88 9/20.99 9/20.91 7/2 7/21.11 7/21.10 9/20.89 7/21.19 7/21.00 9/2 9/21.11 7/21.11 7/21.09 15/21.26 7/21.12 7/2 7/21.24 15/21.13 15/21.11 7/21.26 15/21.14 15/2 15/21.25 13/21.25 9/21.13 13/21.29 13/21.29 5/2 13/21.26 9/21.29 13/21.13 9/21.42 15/21.43 13/2 11/21.45 5/21.44 5/21.21 5/21.46 9/21.45 3/2 5/21.46 15/21.53 3/21.26 15/21.53 5/21.49 9/2 3/21.57 3/21.54 15/21.45 11/21.63 11/21.54 15/2 15/21.67 11/21.62 11/21.45 3/21.67 13/21.68 11/2 19/21.75 19/21.66 19/21.47 17/21.69 3/21.68 19/2 17/21.76 13/21.76 17/21.55 13/21.74 19/21.71 17/2 13/21.91 17/21.83 13/21.70 19/21.74 17/21.83 13/2 17/21.99 19/21.83 17/21.73 17/21.89 19/21.88 23/2 19/22.01 17/21.87 23/21.73 19/22.02 17/21.93 17/2 21/22.10 21/21.97 21/21.76 21/22.09 21/22.05 19/2 23/22.12 23/22.04 19/21.76 23/22.16 23/22.13 21/2 25/22.40 23/22.24 1/22.08 25/22.32 23/22.19 1/2 1/22.47 21/22.26 25/22.22 23/22.42 21/22.21 23/2 23/22.56 25/22.28 23/22.28 21/22.44 27/22.24 21/2 21/22.60 27/22.30 21/22.32 27/22.47 25/22.26 27/2 Yuan, Y.C. Ge, Q.T. Li, H. Hua, D.X. Jiang, X.F. Yang, F.R. Xu, J.C. Pei, J. Li, W. Jiang, Y.L. Sun, H.L. Zang, Y. Zhang, N. Aoi, E. Ideguchi, H.J. Ong, J. Lee, J. Wu, H.N. Liu, C. Wen, Y. Ayyad, K. Hatanaka, T.D. Tran, T. Yamamoto, M. Tanaka, T. Suzuki, Phys. Lett. B 781, 412 (2018). [10] J. Chen, J.L. Lou, Y.L. Ye, Z.H. Li, D.Y. Pang, C.X. Yuan, Y.C. Ge, Q.T. Li, H. Hua, D.X. Jiang, X.F. Yang, F.R. Xu, J.C. Pei, J. Li, W. Jiang, Y.L. Sun, H.L. Zang, Y. Zhang, G. Li, N. Aoi, E. Ideguchi, H.J. Ong, J. Lee, J. Wu, H.N. Liu, C. Wen, Y. Ayyad, K. Hatanaka, D.T. Tran, T. Yamamoto, M. Tanaka, and T. Suzuki, Phys Rev. C 98, 014616 (2018). [11] R. Han, X.Q. Li, W.G. Jiang, Z.H. Li, H. Hua, S.Q. Zhang, C.X. Yuan, D.X. Jiang, Y.L. Ye, J. Li, Z.H. Li, F.R. Xu, Q.B. Chen, J. Meng, J.S. Wang, C. Xu, Y.L. Sun, C.G. Wang, H.Y. Wu, C.Y. Niu, C.G. Li, C. He, W. Jiang, P.J. Li, H.L. Zang, J. Feng, S.D. Chen, Q. Liu, X.C. Chen, H.S. Xu, Z.G. Hu, Y.Y. Yang, P. Ma, J.B. Ma, S.L. Jin, Z. Bai, M.R. Huang, Y.J. Zhou, W.H. Ma, Y. Li, X.H. Zhou, Y.H. Zhang, G.Q. Xiao, W.L. Zhan, Phys. Lett. B 772, 529 (2017). [12] Z.Q. Chen, Z.H. Li, H. Hua, H. Watanabe, C.X. Yuan, S.Q. Zhang, G. Lorusso, S. Nishimura, H. Baba, F. Browne, G. Benzoni, K. Y. Chae, F.C.L. Crespi, P. Doornenbal, N. Fukuda, G. Gey, R. Gernh¨auser, N. Inabe, T. Isobe, D.X. Jiang, A. Jungclaus, H.S. Jung, Y. Jin, D. Kameda, G.D. Kim, Y.K. Kim, I. Kojouharov, F.G. Kondev, T. Kubo, N. Kurz, Y.K. Kwon, X.Q. Li, J.L. Lou, G.J. Lane, C.G. Li, D.W. Luo, A. Montaner-Piz´a, K. Moschner, C.Y. Niu, F. Naqvi, M. Niikura, H. Nishibata, A. Odahara, R. Orlandi, Z. Patel, Zs. Podoly´ak, T. Sumikama, P.-A. S¨oderstr¨om, H. Sakurai, H. Schaﬀner, G.S. Simpson, K. Steiger, H. Suzuki, J. Taprogge, H. Takeda, Zs. Vajta, H.K. Wang, J. Wu, A. Wendt, C.G. Wang, H.Y. Wu, X. Wang, C.G. Wu, C. Xu, Z.Y. Xu, A. Yagi, Y.L. Ye, and K. Yoshinaga, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 212502 (2019). [13] S.J. Steer, Zs. Podoly´ak, S. Pietri, M.G´orska, P.H. Regan, D. Rudolph, E. Werner-Malento, A.B. Garnsworthy, R. Hoischen, J. Gerl, H.J. Wollersheim, K.H. Maier, H. Grawe, F. Becker, P. Bednarczyk, L. C´aceres, P. Doornenbal, H. Geissel, J. Gr¸ebosz, A. Kelic, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, F. Montes, W. Prokopwicz, T. Saito, H. Schaﬀner, S. Tashenov, A. Heinz, M. Pf¨utzner, T. Kurtukian-Nieto, G. Benzoni, A. Jungclaus, D.L. Balabanski, C. Brandau, A. Brown, A.M. Bruce, W.N. Catford, I.J. Cullen, Zs. Dombr´adi, M.E. Estevez, W. Gelletly, G. Ilie, J. Jolie, G.A. Jones, M. Kmiecik, F.G. Kondev, R. Kr¨ucken, S. Lalkovski, Z. Liu, A. Maj, S. Myalski, S. Schwertel, T. Shizuma, P. M. Walker, E. WernerMalento, and O. Wieland, Phys. Rev. C 78, 061302(R) (2008). [14] http://www.nndc.bnl.gov/nudat2/ [15] E. Wilson, Zs. Podoly´ak, H. Grawe, B.A. Brown, C.J. Chiara, S. Zhu, B. Fornal, R.V.F. Janssens, C.M. Shand, M. Bowry, M. Bunce, M.P. Carpenter, N. CieplickaOry´nczak, A.Y. Deo, G.D. Dracoulis, C.R. Hoﬀman, R.S. Kempley, F.G. Kondev, G.J. Lane, T. Lauritsen, G. Lotay, M.W. Reed, P.H. Regan, C. Rodr´ıguez Triguero, D. Seweryniak, B. Szpak, P.M. Walker, Phys. Lett. B 747, 88 (2015). [16] T. Suzuki, T. Yoshida, T. Kajino, T. Otsuka, Phys. Rev. C 85, 15802 (2012). [17] N. Nishimura, Zsolt Podoly´ak, D.L. Fang, T. Suzuki, Phys. Lett. B 756, 273 (2016). [18] M. Wang, G. Audi, F.G. Kondev, W.J. Huang, S. Naimi, and Xing Xu, Chin. Phys. C, 41(3), 030003 (2017). [19] E.K. Warburton, Phys. Rev. C 44, 233 (1991). [20] T.T.S. Kuo and G.H. Herling, US Naval Research Laboraotory, Report No. 2258, unpublished (1971). [21] G.H. Herling and T.T.S. Kuo, Nucl. Phys. A 181, 113 (1972). [22] L. Rydstr¨om, J. Blomqvist, R. J. Liotta, and C. Pomar, Nucl. Phys. A 512, 217 (1990). [23] E.K. Warburton and B.A. Brown, Phys. Rev. C 43, 602 (1991). [24] M.D. Sun, Z. Liu, T.H. Huang, W.Q. Zhang, J.G. Wang, X.Y. Liu, B. Ding, Z.G. Gan, L. Ma, H.B. Yang, Z.Y. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Jiang, K.L. Wang, Y.S. Wang, M.L. Liu, Z.H. Li, J. Li, X. Wang, H.Y. Lu, C.J. Lin, L.J. Sun, N.R. Ma, C.X. Yuan, W. Zuo, H.S. Xu, X.H. Zhou, G.Q. Xiao, C. Qi, and F.S. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B 771, 303 (2017). [25] M.M. Zhang, H.B. Yang, Z.G. Gan, Z.Y. Zhang, M.H. Huang, L. Ma, C.L. Yang, C.X. Yuan, Y.S. Wang, Y.L.Tian, H.B. Zhou, S. Huang, X.T. He, S.Y. Wang, W.Z. Xu, H.W. Li, X.X. Xu, J.G. Wang, H.R. Yang, L.M. Duan, W.Q. Yang, S.G. Zhou, Z.Z. Ren, X.H. Zhou, H.S. Xu, A.A. Voinovk, Yu.S. Tsyganovk, A.N. Polyakovk, and M.V. Shumeiko, Phys. Lett. B 800, 135102 (2020). [26] T. Otsuka, T. Suzuki, M. Honma, Y. Utsuno, N. Tsunoda, K. Tsukiyama, and M. Hjorth-Jensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 012501 (2010). [27] G. Bertsch, J. Borysowicz, H. McManus, and W. G. Love, Nucl. Phys. A284, 399 (1977). [28] C. Yuan, T. Suzuki, T. Otsuka, F.R. Xu, and N. Tsunoda, Phys Rev. C 85, 064324 (2012). [29] Y. Utsuno, T. Otsuka, B. A. Brown, M. Honma, T. Mizusaki, and N. Shimizu, Phys Rev. C 86, 051301(R) (2012). [30] T. Togashi, N. Shimizu, Y. Utsuno, T. Otsuka, and M. Honma, Phys Rev. C 91, 024320 (2015). [31] C. Yuan, Zhong Liu, Furong Xu, P.M. Walker, Zs. Podoly´ak, C. Xu, Z.Z. Ren, B. Ding, M.L. Liu, X.Y. Liu, H.S. Xu, Y.H. Zhang, X.H. Zhou, W. Zuo, Phys. Lett. B 762, 237 (2016). [32] C.X. Yuan, Chin. Phys. C, 41(10), 104102, (2017). [33] J. Dobaczewski, W. Nazarewicz, and P.G. Reinhard, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 41, 074001 (2014). [34] W.D. Myers and W.J. Swiatecki, Nucl. Phys. 81, 1 (1966). [35] P. M¨oller and J.R. Nix, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 59, 185 (1995). [36] K. Pomorski and J. Dudek, Phys. Rev. C 67, 044316 (2003). [37] S. Goriely, N. Chamel, and J.M. Pearson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 152503 (2009). [38] S. Goriely, N. Chamel, and J.M. Pearson, Phys. Rev. C 88, 061302(R) (2013). [39] M. Liu, N.Wang, Y. Deng, and X. Wu, Phys. Rev. C 84, 014333 (2011). [40] N. Wang, M. Liu, X.Z. Wu, and J. Meng, Phys. Lett. B 734, 215 (2014). [41] T. Suzuki, T. Otsuka, C.X. Yuan, and A. Navin, Phys. Lett. B 753, 199 (2016). [42] G.T. Garvey and I. Kelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 197 (1966). [43] Y.Y. Cheng, Y.M. Zhao, and A. Arima, Phys. Rev. C 90, 064304 (2014). [44] G.J. Fu, Y.Y. Cheng, Y.H. Zhang, P. Zhang, P. Shuai, Y.M. Zhao, and M. Wang, Phys. Rev. C 97, 024339 (2018). [45] B.M.S. Amro, C.J. Lister, E.A. McCutchan, W. Loveland, P. Chowdhury, S. Zhu, A.D. Ayangeakaa, J.S. Barrett, M.P. Carpenter, C.J. Chiara, J.P. Greene, J.L. Harker, R.V.F. Janssens, T. Lauritsen, A.A. Sonzogni, W.B. Walters, and R. Yanez, Phys. Rev. C 95, 014330 (2017). [46] A.M. Lane and E.D. Pendlebury, Nucl. Phys. 15, 39 (1960). [47] J.C. Carter, W.T. Pinkston, and W.W. True, Phys. Rev. 120, 504 (1960). [48] A. Gottardo, J.J. Valiente-Dob´on, G. Benzoni, A.I. Morales, A. Gadea, S. Lunardi, P. Boutachkov, A.M. Bruce, M. G´orska, J. Grebosz, S. Pietri, Zs. Podoly´ak, M. Pf¨utzner, P.H. Regan, D. Rudolph, H. Weick, J. Alc´antara N´u˜nez, A. Algora, N. Al-Dahan, G. de Angelis, Y. Ayyad, N. Alkhomashi, P.R.P. Allegro, D. Bazzacco, J. Benlliure, M. Bowry, A. Bracco, M. Bunce, F. Camera, E. Casarejos, M.L. Cortes, F.C.L. Crespi, A. Corsi, A.M. Denis Bacelar, A.Y. Deo, C. DomingoPardo, M. Doncel, Zs. Dombradi, T. Engert, K. Eppinger, G.F. Farrelly, F. Farinon, H. Geissel, J. Gerl, N. Goel, E. Gregor, T. Habermann, R. Hoischen, R. Janik, S. Klupp, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, S.M. Lenzi, S. Leoni, S. Mandal, R. Menegazzo, D. Mengoni, B. Million, D.R. Napoli, F. Naqvi, C. Nociforo, A. Prochazka, W. Prokopowicz, F. Recchia, R.V. Ribas, M.W. Reed, E. Sahin, H. Schaﬀner, A. Sharma, B. Sitar, D. Siwal, K. Steiger, P. Strmen, T.P.D. Swan, I. Szarka, C.A. Ur, P.M. Walker, O. Wieland, H-J. Wollersheim, F. Nowacki, and E. Maglione, Phys. Rev. C 99, 054326 (2019). [49] R. Broda, L.W. Iskra, R.V.F. Janssens, B.A. Brown, B. Fornal, J. Wrzesi´nski, N. Cieplicka-Ory´nczak, M.P. Carpenter, C.J. Chiara, C.R. Hoﬀman, F.G. Kondev, G.J. Lane, T. Lauritsen, Zs. Podoly´ak, D. Seweryniak, W. B. Walters, and S. Zhu, Phys. Rev. C 98, 024324 (2018). [50] P.R. John, J.J. Valiente-Dob´on, D. Mengoni, V. Modamio, S. Lunardi, D. Bazzacco, A. Gadea, C. Wheldon, T.R. Rodr´ıguez, T. Alexander, G. de Angelis, N. Ashwood, M. Barr, G. Benzoni, B. Birkenbach, P.G. Bizzeti, A.M. Bizzeti-Sona, S. Bottoni, M. Bowry, A. Bracco, F. Browne, M. Bunce, F. Camera, L. Corradi, F.C.L. Crespi, B. Melon, E. Farnea, E. Fioretto, A. Gottardo, L. Grente, H. Hess, Tz. Kokalova, W. Korten, A. Ku¸so˘glu, S. Lenzi, S. Leoni, J. Ljungvall, R. Menegazzo, C. Michelagnoli, T. Mijatovi´c, G. Montagnoli, D. Montanari, D. R. Napoli, Zs. Podoly´ak, G. Pollarolo, F. Recchia, P. Reiter, O.J. Roberts, E. S¸ahin, M.-D. Salsac, F. Scarlassara, M. Sferrazza, P.-A. S¨oderstr¨om, A.M. Stefanini, S. Szilner, C.A. Ur, A. Vogt, and J. Walshe, Phys. Rev. C 95, 064321 (2017). [51] Zs. Podoly´ak, G.F. Farrelly, P.H. Regan, A.B. Garnsworthy, S.J. Steer, M. G´orska, J. Benlliure, E. Casarejos, S. Pietri, J. Gerl, H.J. Wollersheim, R. Kumar, F. Molina, A. Algora, N. Alkhomashi, G. Benzoni, A. Blazhev, P. Boutachkov, A.M. Bruce, L. Caceres, I.J. Cullen, A.M. Denis Bacelar, P. Doornenbal, M.E. Estevez, Y. Fujita, W. Gelletly, H. Geissel, H. Grawe, J. Gr¸ebosz, R. Hoischen, I. Kojouharov, S. Lalkovski, Z. Liu, K.H. Maier, C. Mihai, D. M¨ucher, B. Rubio, H. Schaﬀner, A. Tamii, S. Tashenov, J.J. Valiente-Dob´on, P.M. Walker, P.J. Woods, Phys. Lett. B 672, 116 (2009). [52] Zs. Podoly´ak, S.J. Steer, S. Pietri, M. G´orska, P.H. Regan, D. Rudolph, A.B. Garnsworthy, R. Hoischen, J. Gerl, H.J. Wollersheim, H. Grawe, K.H. Maier, F. Becker, P. Bednarczyk, L. C´aceres, P. Doornenbal, H. Geissel, J. Grebosz, A. Kelic, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, F. Montes, W. Prokopowicz, T. Saito, H. Schaﬀner, S. Tashenov, A. Heinz, T. Kurtukian-Nieto, G. Benzoni, M. Pf¨utzner, A. Jungclaus, D.L. Balabanski, C. Brandau, B.A. Brown, A.M. Bruce, W.N. Catford, I.J. Cullen, Zs. Dombr´adi, M.E. Estevez, W. Gelletly, G. Ilie, J. Jolie, G.A. Jones, M. Kmiecik, F.G. Kondev, R. Kr¨ucken, S. Lalkovski, Z. Liu, A. Maj, S. Myalski, S. Schwertel, T. Shizuma, P.M. Walker, E. Werner-Malento, O. Wieland, Eur. Phys. J. A 42, 489 (2009). [53] H. Jiang, J.J. Shen, Y.M. Zhao, and A Arima, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 38, 045103 (2011). [54] H. Jiang and Y.M. Zhao, Sci. China Phys. Mech. Astron. 54, 1461 (2011). [55] T. Otsuka, R. Fujimoto, Y. Utsuno, B. A. Brown, M. Honma, and T. Mizusaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 082502 (2001). [56] T. Otsuka, T. Suzuki, R. Fujimoto, H. Grawe, and Y. Akaishi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 232502 (2005). [57] X. Xu, J.H. Liu, C.X. Yuan, Y.M. Xing, M. Wang, Y.H. Zhang, X.H. Zhou, Yu. A. Litvinov, K. Blaum, R.J. Chen, X.C. Chen, C.Y. Fu, B.S. Gao, J.J. He, S. Kubono, Y.H. Lam, H.F. Li, M.L. Liu, X.W. Ma, P. Shuai, M. Si, M.Z. Sun, X.L. Tu, Q. Wang, H.S. Xu, X.L. Yan, J.C. Yang, Y.J. Yuan, Q. Zeng, P. Zhang, X. Zhou, W.L. Zhan, S. Litvinov, G. Audi, S. Naimi, T. Uesaka, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Yamaguchi, A. Ozawa, B.H. Sun, K. Kaneko, Y. Sun, and F.R. Xu, Phys. Rev. C 100, 051303(R) (2019). [58] W.A. Richter, S. Mkhize, and B.A. Brown, Phys. Rev. C 78, 064302 (2008) [59] N.J. Stone, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 111, 1 (2016). [60] T. Kib´edi, T.W. Burrows, M.B. Trzhaskovskaya, P.M. Davidson, C.W. Nestor Jr., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 589, 202 (2008); http://bricc.anu.edu.au [61] M. Honma, T. Otsuka, T. Mizusaki, and M. Hjorth- Jensen, Phys. Rev. C 80, 064323 (2009) [62] A. Arima, K. Shimizu, W. Bentz, and H. Hyuga, Adv. Nucl. Phys. 18, 1 (1986); A. Arima and H. Hyuga, in Mesons in Nuclei, edited by D. H. Wilkinson and M. Rho (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979), Vol. II, p. 683. [63] I. S. Towner, Phys. Rep. 155, 263 (1987); I. S. Towner and F. C. Khanna, Nucl. Phys. A399, 334 (1983). [64] N.J. Stone, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 90, 75 (2005). [65] A.I. Morales, G. Benzoni, A. Gottardo, J.J. Valiente- Dob´on, N. Blasi, A. Bracco, F. Camera, F.C.L. Crespi, A. Corsi, S. Leoni, B. Million, R. Nicolini, O. Wieland, A. Gadea, S. Lunardi, M. G´orska, P.H. Regan, Zs. Podoly´ak, M. Pf¨utzner, S. Pietri, P. Boutachkov, H. Weick, J. Grebosz, A.M. Bruce, J. Alc´antara N´u˜nez, A. Algora, N. Al-Dahan, Y. Ayyad, N. Alkhomashi, P.R.P. Allegro, D. Bazzacco, J. Benlliure, M. Bowry, M. Bunce, E. Casarejos, M.L. Cortes, A.M. Denis Bacelar, A.Y. Deo, G. de Angelis, C. Domingo-Pardo, M. Doncel, Zs. Dombradi, T. Engert, K. Eppinger, G.F. Farrelly, F. Farinon, E. Farnea, H. Geissel, J. Gerl, N. Goel, E. Gregor, T. Habermann, R. Hoischen, R. Janik, S. Klupp, I. Kojouharov, N. Kurz, S. Mandal, R. Menegazzo, D. Men- goni, D.R. Napoli, F. Naqvi, C. Nociforo, A. Prochazka, W. Prokopowicz, F. Recchia, R.V. Ribas, M.W. Reed, D. Rudolph, E. Sahin, H. Schaﬀner, A. Sharma, B. Sitar, D. Siwal, K. Steiger, P. Strmen, T.P.D. Swan, I. Szarka, C.A. Ur, P.M. Walker, and H.-J. Wollersheim, Phys. Rev. C 89, 014324 (2014). [66] R. Caballero-Folch, C. Domingo-Pardo, J. Agramunt, A. Algora, F. Ameil, A. Arcones, Y. Ayyad, J. Benlliure, I.N. Borzov, M. Bowry, F. Calvi˜no, D. Cano-Ott, G. Cort´es, T. Davinson, I. Dillmann, A. Estrade, A. Evdokimov, T. Faestermann, F. Farinon, D. Galaviz, A.R. Garc´ıa, H. Geissel, W. Gelletly, R. Gernh¨auser, M. B. G´omez-Hornillos, C. Guerrero, M. Heil, C. Hinke, R. Kn¨obel, I. Kojouharov, J. Kurcewicz, N. Kurz, Yu. A. Litvinov, L. Maier, J. Marganiec, T. Marketin, M. Marta, T. Mart´ınez, G. Mart´ınez-Pinedo, F. Montes, I. Mukha, D.R. Napoli, C. Nociforo, C. Paradela, S. Pietri, Zs. Podoly´ak, A. Prochazka, S. Rice, A. Riego, B. Rubio, H. Schaﬀner, Ch. Scheidenberger, K. Smith, E. Sokol, K. Steiger, B. Sun, J.L. Ta´ın, M. Takechi, D. Testov, H. Weick, E. Wilson, J.S. Winﬁeld, R. Wood, P. Woods, and A. Yeremin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 012501 (2016) [67] R. Caballero-Folch, C. Domingo-Pardo, J. Agramunt, A. Algora, F. Ameil, Y. Ayyad, J. Benlliure, M. Bowry, F. Calvi˜no, D. Cano-Ott, G. Cort`es, T. Davinson, I. Dillmann, A. Estrade, A. Evdokimov, T. Faestermann, F. Farinon, D. Galaviz, A.R. Garc´ıa, H. Geissel, W. Gelletly, R. Gernh¨auser, M.B.G´omez-Hornillos, C. Guerrero, M. Heil, C. Hinke, R. Kn¨obel, I. Kojouharov, J. Kurcewicz, N. Kurz, Yu.A. Litvinov, L. Maier, J. Marganiec, M. Marta, T. Mart´ınez, F. Montes, I. Mukha, D.R. Napoli, C. Nociforo, C. Paradela, S. Pietri, Zs. Podoly´ak, A. Prochazka, S. Rice, A. Riego, B. Rubio, H. Schaﬀner, Ch. Scheidenberger, K. Smith, E. Sokol, K. Steiger, B. Sun, J.L. Ta´ın, M. Takechi, D. Testov, H. Weick, E. Wilson, J.S. Winﬁeld, R. Wood, P.J. Woods, and A. Yeremin, Phys. Rev. C 95, 064322 (2017).