Abstract- A novel palpation-based incision detection strategy in the laryngeal region, potentially for robotic tracheotomy, is proposed in this letter. A tactile sensor is introduced to measure tissue hardness in the specific laryngeal region by gentle contact. respiratory failure becomes a frequent cause of mortality, in The kernel fusion method is proposed to combine the Squared which 25.9% of pneumonia required admitted to Intensive Exponential (SE) kernel with Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) kernel Care Unit (ICU), and 20.1% developed acute respiratory to figure out the drawbacks that the existing kernel functions distress syndrome (ARDS) [1-4]. Tracheotomy creates an are not sufficiently optimal in this scenario. Moreover, we artificial airway with a transverse incision between the trachea further regularize exploration factor and greed factor, and the cartilages and plays a major role in buying time for tactile sensor’s moving distance and the robotic base link's mechanical ventilation [5]. With the development of robotic rotation angle during the incision localization process are minimally invasive surgical systems (RMIS), robotic considered as new factors in the acquisition strategy. We tracheotomy surgery has been further promoted [6]. Prior to conducted simulation and physical experiments to compare the newly proposed algorithm - Rescaling Acquisition Strategy with robotic tracheotomy surgery, precisely identifying the trachea Energy Constraints (RASEC) in trachea detection with current rings and thus the appropriate localization of the incision palpation-based acquisition strategies. The result indicates that region is a critical issue. In the traditional tracheotomy surgery, the proposed acquisition strategy with fusion kernel can the surgeon finds the suitable incision location through successfully localize the incision with the highest algorithm palpation, usually from the inferior border of the thyroid performance (Average Precision 0.932, Average Recall 0.973, cartilage to near the superior sternal fossa area. The Average F score 0.952). During the robotic palpation process, localization accuracy highly depends on the surgeon’s the cumulative moving distance is reduced by 50%, and the experience. However, the robotic tracheotomy system hardly cumulative rotation angle is reduced by 71.4% with no sacrifice determines the appropriate position of the incision or trachea in the comprehensive performance capabilities. Therefore, it rings by direct palpation without tactile feedback directly [7]. proves that RASEC can efficiently suggest the incision zone in Tactile sensors can be installed at the tracheotomy robot’s the laryngeal region and greatly reduced the energy loss. distal end for tactile feedback to the surgeons [8]. We aim at an   RMIS system for tracheotomy that recognizes trachea rings and enables incision localization based on existing tactile sensors as in [9-11].  With the current increasing infections of COVID-19,  There are under-explored aspects in the current tactile localization research: the lack of research on incision Regression (GPR) approach is applied to estimate the localization in a robotic tracheotomy, the homogeneous form hardness distribution of the target region [14]. Combined with of the kernel function in tactile localization situations, and Squared Exponential (SE) Kernel, continuous sweep sampling imbalance impacts of each component through iterations in was proposed to estimate the tissue surface's geometry and the acquisition strategies. Therefore, the paper aims to put hardness based on the GP model [15]. Therefore, the measured forward a novel palpation-based strategy with energy target geometry could be aligned with the preoperative model. constraints for trachea exploration and localization and then Later an online update method was proposed to improve suggest the most suitable incision area for robotic tracheotomy. geometry detection error from 1.3676 mm to 1.3203 mm [16]; The main contributions can be summarized in our work as: differently, to realize the hardness distribution estimation, the  • Introduce tactile exploration and localization framework in discrete sampling method with SE kernel was used under the GP framework. The acquisition strategy chose Expectation the scenario of robotic tracheotomy surgery, targeting the Improvement (EI) to balance exploration term and greed term, problem of trachea localization and incision detection, achieving the RMSE at the range of 0.741.14 mm [17]. The filling a gap in this area of research. Expectation-Maximization (EM) strategy was utilized under  • Propose a novel fusion kernel through combination the Markov random field, sampling preferably at the target  Squared Exponential (SE) kernel with Ornstein-Uhlenbeck center with the highest evaluation [18]. However, this (OU) kernel to optimize the fitting smoothness of the model approach hardly explores the lesion boundaries and ignores compared to the widely used kernel function. the potential presence of other target areas in the unknown area. To localize the lesion boundaries, Implicit Level Set • Design a new rescaling acquisition strategy with energy Upper Confidence Bound (ILS-UCB) algorithm combined constraints, which normalizes each strategy term and with SE kernel gives the acquisition priority to the point with considers the energy constraints, greatly improving the greatest uncertainty in the estimated lesion boundary acquisition efficiency and energy utilization. directly [19]. However, this strategy still cannot solve the  The current research on active trachea palpation and simultaneously determine the shapes of tissue abnormalities incision recommendation are quite rare. Similar research can under the multiple target regions scenario [20]. Later, another refer the lesion localization through the tactile method. There combination pattern with discrete acquisition and continuous are mainly two methods to localize the target region using segmentation was proposed to improve the efficiency [21], as tactile sensors: construct tactile sensing arrays to detect the summarized in Table I. Gaussian Process Implicit Surfaces target tissue or uses tactile sensors to realize discrete (GPIS) instead of SE kernel was imported to describe the measurement for perceiving the overall hardness distribution target shape. Their acquisition strategy collected information [12]. However, as for the tactile sensing arrays, the accuracy from failed grasp attempts and then attempted grasps in areas of the estimation hardness distribution is related to the array with the highest uncertainty (UNC) along the implicit surface density, which puts higher requirements on the manufacturing to estimate the target contour [22]. When the target region is a process. Also, the tactile sensing array presses hard on the narrowly closed surface, the widely used SE kernel function tissue surface, which would generate obvious deformation and can lead to fitting failure due to its excessive smoothness; to might cause pain to the patient. While as for the discrete guarantee that the estimated incision shapes are closed regions. measurement, the hardness distribution can be obtained after Thin Plate (TP) kernel instead of SE kernel was sometimes measuring the hardness value at each point. Although the utilized to describe the correlation among points. However, point-by-point measurement method can obtain the complete TP Kernel sacrifices acquisition stability because of the poor hardness distribution map of the target area, the time cost and smoothness [23, 24]. Therefore, the acquisition efficiency energy cost during the tactile localization will be very high. should be examined together with optimizing the acquisition Therefore, to reduce the high distance, rotation angle and time strategy and the kernel function to ensure integrity. cost of the acquisition point by point, an efficient acquisition strategy is introduced to actively select the point to measure in the palpation process to achieve efficient localization and shape detection of the target region [13].  In this paper, the incision location for robotic tracheotomy is often specified in the softer trachea ring between the certain cricoid cartilages, which will project a closed area on the tissue surface   distinct from the surrounding tissue. Therefore, localizing the trachea ring can be equivalently transformed into the problem to estimate hardness distribution  on the surface of the selected laryngeal area. The hardness distribution of the laryngeal region is described through Gaussian processes (GPs). Generally, these GPs are defined by their mean values and covariance functions. The hardness distribution on the tissue surface is assumed to be a continuous function between the hardness value    and location  , defined on a Riemannian manifold :   . Assume   are located in the acquisition region. Therefore, the prior hardness distribution field    is mapped with mean function  and kernel function  . Here, the prior mean function is set to be zero for simplicity. Furthermore, the next acquisition point can be selected:   , where  is the acquisition function. Assuming that the tracheotomy robot’s end effector is equipped with the tactile sensor, when the tactile sensor contacts the observation areas  in laryngeal region, to measure the hardness value from the corresponding location. After obtaining a set of obtaining the training dataset, GPR algorithm can be imported to estimate new distribution at the     , where K is the    covariance matrix whose elements    are calculated by certain kernel functions,  represents Gaussian white noise in the observation process. Similarly, theoretically above, the proposed active palpation-based incision localization problem is formulated as follows, where  is the predicted acquisition point. The functions  (·) and  (·) refer respectively tactile sensor’s moving distance and the robotic base link’s rotation angle. Hence, by enforcing constraints Eq. (1b) and (1c), the next optimal acquisition point should also respect the energy budget in the palpation process.  In this section, to optimize acquisition efficiency and energy utilization for trachea region localization, we first discuss the various kernel effects, construct a fusion kernel, and propose a novel acquisition strategy from state-of-the-art acquisition methods. Compared to the existing works on active acquisition strategy, our acquisition strategy normalizes each impact term into the same scale and introduces energy constraints (moving distance and rotation angle). Following the baseline above, we will discuss and optimize the acquisition strategy of trachea palpation from two aspects: the optimization of kernel function and the improvement of the acquisition strategy. Both aspects are discussed in more detail in the subsequent sections.  Since the GPR algorithm uses a GP as a prior, the kernel function is highly relevant to the prior information of the data and involve the correlation description between two points  and . Therefore, the prediction results closely depend on the kernel function. The popular kernel function introduced in the GPR algorithm is the Squared Exponential (SE) kernel (shown as Eq. 2) with smooth interpolation characteristics due to its infinite differentiability, and stable convergent performance. Normally, the SE kernel follows as: where  refers to the variance as the amplitude factor, and  is the length scale factor. Both are hyperparameters used to adjust the width of the covariance matrix. However, SEC kernel with the smooth interpolation often results in overfitting. It thus fails to identify the incision boundary accurately.  To avoid the fitting failure, a TP kernel derived from 2D implicit surfaces is introduced as Eq. 3: where      refers to the Eulerian distance between two points, and      denotes the furthest Eulerian distance in the training set. As TP kernel is based on the assumption that the detection target is a closed area in the acquisition space, it is well suited to estimating 2D shape. However, TP kernel describes the interpoint relationship at the expense of smoothness and fitting stability.  Therefore, the relationship between smoothness and fitting stability should be a tradeoff. We utilized the constructure property of the kernel functions [25], and we performed a dot product fusion of the SE kernel function and the OU kernel function (shown as Eq. 5) along with proportionality factors. Noted that Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) kernel simply replace the quadratic Euclidean distance with an absolute distance, which makes the output no longer smooth in the Eq. 4:  where  and  are proportionality factors used for adjusting the kernel effect, and  and  are the length scale factors. In this work, we choose   ,   and  . This dot product combination fixes the problem of being too smooth with a single SE kernel while solving an unstable fit with a single TP kernel. To compare the performance of different kernel functions, the RASEC algorithm probes the square sample of    respectively described by different kernel functions, and the size of the single trachea phantom is   . Here the number of acquisition iterations choose 60. Table II shows the F scores, which indicates that the RASEC algorithm has the best performance under the SE-OU fusion kernel.  Further attention to the distribution contour of the covariance matrix in Fig. 2, SE kernel is highly concentrated at the diagonal and completely ignores the relationship among distant points, ensuring high fitting smoothness; in contrast, the covariance matrix distribution from the TP kernel differs from that of the SE kernel, and the covariance matrix distribution takes full account of the inter-point relationships across the acquisition space to ensure the fitting accuracy, but at the expense of smoothness; while, the width of the covariance matrix distribution from OU kernel will be narrower relative to that from TP kernel, but cover a wider area than that from SE kernel, at the expense of smoothness and fitting stability, but with a very comprehensive description of the points near the diagonal.  The SE-OU kernel combines the advantages of the SE kernel's centralized description towards the acquisition region points with the strengths of the OU kernel's integration consideration around the sub-diagonal of the covariance matrix, ensuring both fitting stability and smoothness.  Therefore, in this work, we choose SE-OU Fusion Kernel to describe the relationship amongst acquisition points.  Active acquisition strategy for detection points is essential to realize the palpation-based incision localization. The design aim is to utilize the known hardness dataset to predict the next location of the optimal acquisition point through trading off greed factor  and exploration factor . In this scenario, the greed factor  denotes estimated tissue softness, which means the greater  value is, the softer the estimated acquisition tissue is. Meanwhile, the exploration factor  represents how much hardness information is known in a certain region. The greater  value is, the less hardness information the acquisition tissue has. The existing popular acquisition strategies, such as Random Acquisition (Baseline), Uncertainty Sampling (UNC) [26], Expectation Improvement (EI) [21], Implicit Level Set Upper Confidence Bound (ILS-UCB) [27], Level Set Estimation (LSE) [28] are introduced to compare. Their hyperparameters is chosen based on the former study correspondingly. The efficiency of several acquisition strategies will be discussed and compared with our proposed RASEC. Considering the feature of these acquisition strategies: first of all, some strategy holds less possibility to localize multiple target regions like ILS-UCB, or not effectively localize multiple target regions, like UNC, LSE, EI. Moreover, their exploration term and greed term are not regularized into same level to weigh. The imbalance of both factors always occurs after acquisition iterations. Therefore, it is necessary to rescale these essential factors into the same scale. Additionally, regarding the energy minimization principle, the tactile sensor’s total distance and robotic base link’s rotation angle during palpation are not considered in current acquisition strategy when evaluating palpation efficiency. We focus on the base link because, among all robotic arm joints, the base link has the largest moment load in charge of the end-effector’s weight, each upper linkage, the corresponding motor, etc. Therefore, reducing the base link’s rotation angle can largely reduce the energy consumption in the trachea palpation process.  Therefore, to figure out the problems above, a novel acquisition strategy - RASEC is proposed shown in Eq. 6, considering the normalization of both essential parts, the moving distance of tactile sensor and the rotation angle of robotic base link, and the formula of RASEC is defined as: where,  Regarding the RASEC, there are four terms to mutually decide the localization of the next acquisition point : the exploration term  , the greed term , the distance term  and the rotation angle term . The  term is used to evaluate the greed effect, and the  term is used to evaluate the exploration effect in acquisition space. The third term  and the fourth term are used to evaluate the tactile sensor’s moving distance and robotic base link’s rotation angle during palpation. Each term uses the Min-Max normalization to rescale into the same comparison level. Meanwhile,  is the orthogonal factor, which holds the same meaning in ILS-UCB.  and  are respectively distance proportionality factor and rotation angle proportionality factor utilized for adjusting the tactile sensor’s moving distance and robotic base link’s rotation angle influence towards the acquisition strategy. The impacts of each term can be adjusted through the proportionality factor. Here, ,  and  are set as 0.5 to better balance each factor's weight. Its core idea is that after localizing the shape of a single trachea region, it will prefer to explore unknown regions to search for a potentially existing target. Since both the exploration and greed terms are normalized, both tradeoffs efficiency will be greatly improved. Meanwhile, considering the predicted acquisition points with similar boundary recognition effects (the weighted sum between the exploration term and greed term), multiple acquisition points differ in the tactile sensor’s distance and base link’s rotation angle referring to the current point. Considering the energy minimization, the third term and fourth term ensure that the robot arm selects the point more adjacent to the current state with the minimum moving distance cost and rotation angle cost.  In this section, we utilize the MATLAB platform for simulation. The effects of various acquisition strategies are compared and discussed according to the estimation hardness distribution results. An experimental study is further operated to verify the feasibility of the proposed RASEC algorithm. In the subsequent paragraphs, the simulation and experiment study are both discussed in detail.  This simulation study discusses the effect of RAS without energy constraints on the integrated acquisition efficiency separately, and then focuses on the influence of moving distance term and rotation angle term. Additional scripts are imported to simulate the acquisition process towards the trachea region, which correspondingly simulates the trachea localization in the laryngeal region. The simulation sample is set as the square scale of   , and its origin is at the square center, within multiple tracheae similar to the human larynx structure. The size of the single incision region is   . The acquisition region is discretized and classified first: when the acquisition point  locates inside the trachea region, its corresponding hardness value  is classified to  , and when  locates outside the trachea region,  is classified to . When  locates on the trachea boundary,  is classified as   .  value is always set higher than , because the region corresponding to  is the trachea region assigned higher expectations. The number of acquisition iterations is set at 60 in the virtual environment. To neutralize the error, we operate each acquisition strategy for the same sample mentioned above for ten acquisition trials, and take the arithmetic mean, and then compare among each other. The hardness estimation distribution maps of each acquisition strategy are shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that, except for ILS- UCB, the rest of the acquisition strategies can successfully detect the presence of multiple trachea regions. Table Ⅲ  shows the average precision rate, recall, and F1 scores of various acquisition strategies above in this simulation. It also indicates that the RASEC algorithm has better performance than other current acquisition strategies in trachea localization with an average precision of 0.932, an average recall rate of 0.973, and an average F score of 0.952.  Palpation-based localization simulation is also performed for samples with multiple trachea settings to investigate the moving distance term and the rotation angle term in the RASEC. Since the robotic base link’s rotation angle is directly related to the distance between the robot and the sample, here, the distance from the robot base to the center of the sample is assumed as . Therefore, the proposed RASEC algorithm in this paper is not only better than other acquisition strategies for simultaneous localizing incision but also can highly optimize the moving distance of tactile sensor and rotation angle of the base link, thus shortening the palpation detection time and highly reducing the energy loss, meanwhile improving the detection efficiency.  The F scores between RASEC algorithm with and without additional term tend to be same as the number of acquisition points increases (shown in Fig. 4), indicating that it can achieve accurate localization and shape detection of multiple trachea regions with or without adding the two energy constraint terms of moving distance and rotation angle. Regarding energy utilization, the tactile sensor’s moving distance and the base link’s rotation angle are greatly affected, especially the rotation angle of the base. The total moving distance is reduced to nearly 50%, and the total rotation angle is reduced to 71.4% after adding up the distance constraint term and rotation constraint term.  The experiment platform is established to verify the capacity to locate the tracheal incision in the real sample, as shown in Fig. 5. To mimic the Robotic Tracheotomy, we use Ecoflex 00-10 to create actual samples corresponding to the laryngeal region according to the shape of the incision and the actual acquisition range (small range, large range) and use our tactile sensor installed on the UR5 robotic arm’s end to measure hardness value with slight contact. This tactile  This paper proposes an acquisition strategy for active kernel is proposed according to the needs of this paper. The trachea palpation and incision recommendation in the acquisition strategy- RASEC is further discussed and laryngeal region, with the improvement of kernel function compared with the existing acquisition strategies. The and the design of the novel acquisition strategy. As for the simulation study proves that the proposed RASEC algorithm sensor holds the threshold of 192 Hz/ 0.6 MPa, which can realize hardness measurement of soft tissue, and a hard range (which exceeds 0.6 MPa) with higher frequency to realize the identification of the stiff tissue [29]. Therefore, this tactile sensor could meet our specific need for incision localization. Two silicone samples are with the size of    detection area made with Ecoflex 00-10 as the phantom of the laryngeal sampling area. One had a groove in the base as a single incision, and the other had two grooves as a multi-incision distribution area. When the mixed Ecoflex 00-10 is injected into the base, the area corresponding to the groove will be softer, like the softer trachea area in the larynx region, as shown in Fig. 5 (b)(c). As for laryngeal phantom A& B, the number of acquisition iteration in the experiment is respectively set to 17 and 40. Considering the principle of energy minimization, the sensor’s end in this letter contacts with the sample in a sliding-like manner to move in close proximity to the sample surface as shown in Fig. 5 (d)(e).The experimental results further verify that the proposed RASEC algorithm can achieve the objectives of incision localization and shape detection efficiently through active tactile acquisition. can achieve the localization of multiple incisions existing in to realize the coordinate calibration between the physical the laryngeal region, shorten the tactile sensor’s moving sample and the robot. At the same time, this paper lays a distance, and greatly reduce the base link’s rotation angle, certain foundation for the subsequent robotic tracheotomy further improving the algorithm's efficiency. Finally, the surgery. A more practical and well-established robotic system experimental platform is established with a tactile sensor for tracheotomy surgery will be built by adding the control installed on the UR5 robot arm’s end for palpation module onto the incision recommendation. experiments. Two silicone samples with the groove-setup base are built as the laryngeal phantoms. The physical palpation experiment further proves the effectiveness of the proposed RASEC algorithm in trachea localization and Zhang for their help understanding the GPR algorithm， Xinyi incision recommendation. Zhou's suggestions on visualizing kernel functions, and  The future work is to implant the visual alignment module Yinhe Li’s contribution during the video processing.