Keywords: Bayesian Statistics, Computing, Curriculum, MCMC, Simulation-based learning In the American Statistical Association’s Statement on p-values, George Cobb’s comment on the ASA Discussion Forum highlighted how the use of p-value of 0.05 is the norm because colleges and graduate schools teach it, and subsequently the scientiﬁc community uses it. On the other hand, the scientiﬁc community uses it because colleges and graduate schools teach it (Wasserstein & Lazar 2016). Evidently, educational programs are at the heart of scientiﬁc practice. In addition to frequentist methods where p-value is at the core of statistical inference, Bayesian methods provide a diﬀerent and perhaps more intuitive perspective. A recent preprint advocates for advancing a Bayesian perspective on probability and uncertainty in science education, with the goal of building trust in science (Rosenberg et al. 2021). Thanks to recent and ongoing developments in probabilistic programming, Bayesian statistics is becoming more accessible to practitioners and therefore more widely used. In order for the scientiﬁc community to beneﬁt from its advances, Bayesian statistics needs to ﬁnd its place in educational programs. Bayesian statistics as a course is more often taught at the graduate level, if taught at all. A simple job search on Google for “Bayesian statistician” returns multiple ads for this job title as well as other job titles with Bayesian statistics as a requirement. Some of these jobs only require bachelor’s degrees. With the advances in tools and the rise of popularity, Bayesian statistics is becoming more important for undergraduates as well. What we currently know about the current state of undergraduate Bayesian education is not much. The literature suggests a limited oﬀering of Bayesian courses at the undergraduate level. For instance, none of the top 10 statistics programs require a Bayesian course and not all of them oﬀer such a course (Hoegh 2020). Some Bayesian educators have described their own Bayesian courses as examples (Witmer 2017, Hu 2020, Hoegh 2020). Recently, there has also been a panel of four statistics educators who teach such courses discussing their own pedagogical approaches (Johnson et al. 2020). Since the discussions around undergraduate Bayesian education are relatively new, these publications have ﬁlled a much-needed gap in the literature. However, most of these works are based on speciﬁc undergraduate Bayesian courses at speciﬁc institutions. To have a more comprehensive and broader picture of the current state of undergraduate Bayesian education, we decided to analyze Bayesian courses across diﬀerent institutions. Our primary interest in this study was to know how commonly Bayesian statistics is taught at the undergraduate level as a course and how it is taught. For simplicity, our use of a Bayesian course refers to a Bayesian course for undergraduate students throughout the paper. For the identiﬁed Bayesian courses, we wanted to see how they ﬁt in the overall undergraduate programs. We also wanted to have a deeper understanding of these courses, including the prerequisites required, topics covered, and the tools (e.g., software) that they adopted. To answer these questions, we collected data from 152 high-ranking research universities and liberal arts colleges and focused on understanding whether an undergraduate Bayesian course is oﬀered or not, and how each identiﬁed course ﬁts into the undergraduate curricula. We also collected syllabi from existing courses and conducted a series of analyses on topics covered, programming and computing tools, and assessments of these courses. The main goals of this paper are to provide an overview of the current state of Bayesian education at the undergraduate level, provide recommendations for programs looking to oﬀer undergraduate Bayesian courses, and share a list of resources (e.g., software and textbooks) for aspiring and current Bayesian educators. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the details of our data collection procedures. Our results based on analyses of program curricula and course syllabi are reported in Section 3, followed by our recommendations in Section 4. We end the paper with a few concluding remarks in Section 5. To ﬁnd out whether Bayesian courses are commonly oﬀered, we surveyed all universities with a ranking of 100 or higher (i.e., better ranking) and liberal arts colleges with a ranking of 50 or higher based on US News rankings (2021a; 2021b). To avoid confusion, in this paper we use the word “university” when referring to a research university, “college” when referring to a liberal arts college, and “institution” when referring to a research university or a liberal arts college. We purposefully selected these institutions because we wanted a pool of institutions that are likely to oﬀer Bayesian courses. Our selection enabled us to examine the course content as well as programming and computing tools, assessments, and the textbooks adopted in the courses for the subsequent research questions that we were interested in. In this process, we identiﬁed 102 research universities and 50 colleges for further analysis. After obtaining this sample of institutions, we collected data from the institutions’ websites regarding the courses and programs they oﬀer in course catalogs spanning two academic years, from Fall 2019 to Summer 2021. We deliberately narrowed our search to a two-year time frame because a Bayesian course being oﬀered in longer intervals would be very unlikely to be accessible to all students in an academic program. In other words, while junior and senior students are the ones who are most likely to satisfy the course prerequisites, they would not have access to a Bayesian course if it is oﬀered less frequently. We note that we only tracked courses that contain the word “Bayesian” in the title of the course and eliminated any courses that only include “Bayesian” in the course description. To get an overview of how these Bayesian courses ﬁt in the undergraduate curricula, we tracked in which department the Bayesian course is oﬀered, whether the course is crosslisted for undergraduate and graduate enrollment, and whether it is part of any major as an elective or a required course. To examine course prerequisites, we recorded whether the course has calculus, probability, linear algebra, statistics, and programming courses as prerequisites or not and noted down any other less common prerequisites we encountered. During data collection from institutions’ websites, we were faced with two challenges. The ﬁrst one related to how to identify whether the Bayesian course is required or an elective course for a major, since such information may not be readily available on course catalogs. Given this challenge, we aimed at ﬁnding speciﬁc major requirements and whether the Bayesian course is part of it. Speciﬁcally, we searched through the list of majors at a given institution by looking for majors that may contain the strings of “statistic”, “math”, “comput” identiﬁed Bayesian course is part of the major or not. To make sure not to exclude any majors that might have possibly fallen out from our search strings (e.g., psychology), we or “data.” For each major satisfying these criteria, we noted whether the ran a Google search with the intuition name, speciﬁc course number, and the string “major requirements.” Our second challenge was about understanding the prerequisite requirements for the identiﬁed Bayesian courses. First of all, the prerequisites and how they are oﬀered vary from one institution to another. Moreover, at many institutions, students can take diﬀerent paths leading to the Bayesian course. Last but not least, some institutions have concurrent requirements for students enrolled in the Bayesian course. To tackle this challenge, we focused on counting the minimum number of courses a student has to take before or concurrently enrolling in the Bayesian course. To get further information about the course content, we relied on course syllabi. During data collection from institutions’ websites, we downloaded the available syllabi directly from the course catalogs. We also searched department websites and conducted a Google search to locate additional syllabi online. In addition, we reached out to the instructors who oﬀered the course most recently and asked for their syllabi. In total, we collected 29 syllabi through an online search and our correspondence with instructors. In the 50 colleges that we examined, there are six Bayesian courses and among the 102 universities, there are forty-ﬁve Bayesian courses. Of the universities oﬀering such courses, 27 courses are cross-listed between undergraduate and graduate programs, meaning that undergraduate students take these courses along with graduate-level peers. Moreover, 5 universities have two Bayesian courses. In this section, we investigate the major disciplines and the prerequisite requirements of these 51 identiﬁed Bayesian courses. Since there exists a high variance in how the majors are named across diﬀerent institutions, we ﬁrst performed a classiﬁcation of majors into broader plural labels before analyzing the major disciplines breakdown of our identiﬁed Bayesian courses. For example, under “Statistical Sciences”, we included common majors, such as “Statistical Science”, “Statistics”, and “Applied Statistics”. In this group, we also included less common majors, such as “Actuarial Science” and “Biometry and Statistics”. Moreover, we created “Combination of Statistical, Mathematical, Computer, or Data Sciences” to include majors such as “Statistics and Data Science”, “Math and Statistics”, and “Mathematics and Computer Science”, as these names usually refer to more than one single discipline. Table 1: Summary of Major Disciplines that Explicitly Include an Elective or a Required Bayesian Course After this classiﬁcation procedure, we summarize the major disciplines that have the Bayesian course as an elective or a required course in Table 1. At multiple institutions, the Bayesian course counts towards multiple majors, resulting in the total number of majors displayed in Table 1 exceeding the total number of our identiﬁed Bayesian courses. Even using broader plural labels, we observe that the Bayesian courses are oﬀered as part of a variety of majors across the institutions. As anticipated, most of the time, the Bayesian courses are part of majors that include statistical, mathematical, computer, or data sciences, or a combination of these ﬁelds. Although a few in number, majors in biological sciences, business, economics, and management also have a Bayesian course. Even fewer in number, we identiﬁed Bayesian courses that are part of psychology and cognitive sciences, public policy and political science, geological and planetary sciences, philosophy, physics, and quantitative science majors. Despite the fact that for some of these ﬁelds we only identiﬁed one instance of a Bayesian course being counted towards the major, seeing a Bayesian course as part of a variety of disciplines at the undergraduate level is extremely important and a new ﬁnding for us. We also note that the Bayesian courses are much more often to be an elective than being a required course. Among the four instances of required courses, two are from statistical sciences while the other two are from data sciences. One important takeaway for advancing Bayesian education at the undergraduate level, which leads to one of our recommendations in Section 4, is to make Bayesian courses be part of majors and if possible, required. An important aspect of understanding how the Bayesian courses ﬁt in the program curricula is about what kind of preparation students need, i.e., the prerequisite requirements. As discussed in Section 2, we focused on the minimum number of prerequisite courses a student needs to take. We summarize the number of prerequisites, and the types of prerequisite courses and their popularity in Table 2 (the numbers for speciﬁc courses are median values). As can be seen in the ﬁrst two columns of Table 2, the number of prerequisites ranges from zero to ten. A majority of the Bayesian courses have 3 - 6 prerequisites, with 6 as the mode. The remaining columns of Table 2 present the types of prerequisite courses and their popularity. Speciﬁcally, we tracked calculus, linear algebra, computing, probability and statistics, and other courses that fall outside of this classiﬁcation. Clearly, diﬀerent programs have diﬀerent prior knowledge expectations from students entering the Bayesian course. For instance, consider two institutions that require six prerequisite courses. One requires 3 calculus and 3 statistics and probability courses while the other one requires 1 calculus and 5 statistics and probability courses. We conjecture that the approaches to teaching Bayesian methods can be quite diﬀerent, leading to prerequisites varying in nature. As a side note, we identiﬁed Bayesian courses that are oﬀered outside of statistics departments and have no probability or statistics prerequisites, a ﬁnding that may surprise many statistics educators. Despite the high variance in prior knowledge expectations of the Bayesian courses, there are a few conclusions we can draw. First, it is common for Bayesian courses to be calculusbased. Second, linear algebra is a requirement mainly for courses that have high a number of prerequisites (greater than six). Last but not least, almost all of the Bayesian courses have either a statistics, probability or statistics and probability course prerequisite. In terms of mathematical preparation, we report our ﬁndings with the number of courses in the parenthesis (out of the total 51 identiﬁed courses). Overall, many Bayesian courses have three calculus courses as a prerequisite (22), some require two calculus courses (15), and a few require only a single course in calculus (5). There are also many Bayesian courses that do not require calculus courses at all (8). In comparison to calculus, linear algebra is Table 2: Summary of Prerequisite Courses of the Bayesian Courses a much less common prerequisite (1). As computing is an important and interwoven component in a Bayesian course, we dive deeper into analyzing the computing prerequisites. We again report the number of identiﬁed courses based on their computing requirement in parenthesis (out of 51). While some courses mention some sort of computing prerequisite (17), not all of these mentions are prerequisite courses. The explicitly stated computing prerequisite courses include introductory computer programming courses (4), statistical computing (2), R for data science (1), data science with R (1), R programming (1), data structures (1), computational thinking and doing (1), and SAS programming (1). We also identiﬁed one institution that has two computing prerequisites including an introductory computer programming course and a data structures course. In addition, some course descriptions mention speciﬁc computing software, knowledge or skill as opposed to a speciﬁc course. For instance, some mentions include “R recommended”, “familiarity with R”, “basics of R programming required”, “some acquaintance with fundamentals of computer programming”, and “familiarity with some programming language or numerical computing environment”. Last but not least, we examined the probability and statistics prerequisites in detail. The detailed course title and the number of Bayesian courses requiring it is summarized in Table 3. The median number of probability and statistics prerequisites is 2 and the range is from 0 to 5. As can be seen, the probability and statistics prerequisite requirements vary from one course to another. The most notable takeaway is that many programs require a course on probability and the most common statistical prerequisite is a course on linear models. Analyzing collected syllabi can provide further insight on course content, tools, and assessments. Among the collected 29 syllabi, there are 3 syllabi from colleges and 26 from universities. Depending on the institution’s academic calendar, these courses run between 10 weeks (quarter system) and 16 weeks (semester system) of instruction period. Some have designated lab sessions and the majority of the courses at universities have teaching support such as one or more teaching assistants. In our syllabi analyses in this section, we Table 3: Summary of Statistics and Probability Courses that are Prerequisites of Bayesian Courses focus on three aspects: the Bayesian topics covered in the course, the programming and computing tools, and the course assessments. First, we present the analysis of topics, where we group the identiﬁed topics into three general areas: foundations of Bayesian inference, Bayesian computing, and Bayesian modeling. When discussing a topic, we include the number of courses (out of the total 29 collected syllabi) in the parenthesis to indicate its popularity among instructors. We note that some syllabi are more descriptive in the topics they cover while others mention less information. Nevertheless, we believe the identiﬁed topics and their popularity show implications of what is being considered as important by instructors when teaching Bayesian statistics at the undergraduate level. Figure 1: The top four most popular topics of foundations of Bayesian inference. When introducing the foundations of Bayesian inference, among the single-parameter models, beta-binomial (10) and normal-normal (8) are the most popular topics chosen by the instructors. Only a few would continue to discuss the multi-parameter model of normal (2). It is worth noting that the topic of multivariate normal model, which is relatively common in graduate level courses (e.g., Hoﬀ (2009)), is rarely mentioned in the collected syllabi (1). This ﬁnding suggests that instructors for undergraduate Bayesian courses, not surprisingly, tend to choose simpler problem settings to introduce Bayesian inference basics, which we believe could achieve the learning outcomes just as well. Under these simple single-parameter settings, many instructors discuss the important concepts of conjugacy (7) and posterior prediction (5), while a few cover the sequential update nature of Bayesian inference (2), credible intervals (2), hypothesis testing (3), and posterior predictive checks (1). In Figure 1 we show the top 4 most popular topics of foundations of Bayesian inference. Area 2: Bayesian computing Moving to the set of Bayesian computing topics, we found about 1/5 of all instructors ﬁrst introduce Monte Carlo simulation (6). A majority of the instructors discuss Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) speciﬁcally (15). Among them, about a half also discuss MCMC diagnostics (7). The Gibbs sampler seems the most popular MCMC algorithm (8), followed by the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (6) and the Metropolis algorithm (5). Albert & Hu (2020) discuss the pros and cons of introducing the Gibbs sampler and the Metropolis algorithm in undergraduate statistics curriculum. They argue that students need a background in calculus and familiarity with the posterior derivation for creating a Gibbs sampler, and once they are prepared, the concept and implementation will follow. By contrast, the Metropolis algorithm is less challenging conceptually than the Gibbs, although it does require tuning of the parameters in the proposal distribution. Now adding the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm into the toolkit, we recognize that the Metropolis-Hastings is perhaps the most challenging algorithm among the three, since understanding it and implementing it require the combined skills and knowledge of the Gibbs and the Metropolis. Nevertheless, our analysis shows that instructors are more often to cover the Metropolis-Hastings over the Metropolis. Moreover, the fact that the Gibbs is the most mentioned topic indicates that the instructors place a big emphasis on posterior derivation in their Bayesian courses. We also note that as the popularity of Stan grows (Stan Development Team (2021)), some instructors introduce Hamilton Monte Carlo (4) as an additional Bayesian computing technique. Analyses about these additional and less common topics will be presented at the end of this section. Figure 2 shows the top 4 most popular topics of Bayesian computing. Area 3: Bayesian mo deling When covering Bayesian modeling techniques, Bayesian linear regression is by far the most selected topic (20), immediately followed by hierarchical modeling (18), which encompasses many appealing features of Bayesian statistics. Logistic regression (6), or more generally, generalized linear models (8), are also covered by a good number of instruc- Figure 2: The top four most popular topics of Bayesian computing. tors. Moreover, mixture modeling, a traditionally more advanced modeling technique, is selected by a not-so-small number of instructors (5), whose implementation we believe is made much simpler by various MCMC software. Figure 3 shows the top 4 most popular topics of Bayesian modeling. Additional topics The analysis of additional topics shows that many instructors more formally introduce how to choose Bayesian models, which we consider as part of the area of foundations of Bayesian inference. Among them, model checking (4), model comparison (6), and model selection (5) are relatively popular topics. We also highlight the choice of discussing more advanced priors (5), and even the Dirichlet process prior (1). When it comes to Bayesian computing, in addition to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (4), variational inferences/variational Bayes is another quite advanced topic chosen by instructors for undergraduates (2). For additional Bayesian modeling techniques, we underline the choice of missing data imputation (3), a topic we believe that the Bayesian approach is so natural by treating the missing data as parameters, leading to imputation steps embedded in the MCMC estimation process (Rubin (1987)). The topic of Gaussian processes is favored by several instructors (3). In a few relatively more advanced undergraduate courses, frequentist properties of Bayesian methods are also covered (3). The remaining and less popular additional topics are included in Appendix A1. Figure 3: The top four most popular topics of Bayesian modeling. Our analysis of topics by area shows several popular topics chosen by many instructors: beta-binomial and normal-normal conjugate models and predictions in the area of foundations of Bayesian inference, MCMC, MCMC diagnostics, and the Gibbs sampler for the area of Bayesian computing, and linear regression and hierarchical modeling for the area of Bayesian modeling. We also note model comparison topics and the introduction of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Bayesian computing are relatively popular. Some instructors spend time covering advanced priors beyond conjugate priors, and missing data imputation seems a natural and population modeling technique chosen by some instructors. Last but not least, we notice some courses choose to compare and contrast Bayesian methods to frequentist methods (5), a decision we believe is made mostly based on prerequisites and student background. Given the important role that Bayesian computing plays in the undergraduate Bayesian courses, we dive deeper into the collected syllabi and report our analysis of the programming language(s), computing methods for MCMC estimation, and additional programming packages highlighted by some instructors. Out of the 29 syllabi, 27 contain information about the programming language(s) used in the course. R is the most popular single programming language (19), while Python is the only other choice (3). The remaining instructors either require two languages: R and Python (1) or R and SAS (1); or they allow students to choose from a selection: R or Python (2), or R or Python or Julia (1). When it comes to software choice, 17 courses explicitly discuss the MCMC estimation software they utilize. Stan is the most popular single programming language (7), with JAGS as the second (6). There are also a number of instructors who choose to introduce both (4). One course that utilizes both R and SAS programming languages also uses PROC MCMC which is the procedure for ﬁtting Bayesian models in SAS. Both JAGS and Stan can be used within R with several R packages (also available for Python). For those instructors introducing JAGS into their courses, students learn and practice writing JAGS scripts which are descriptive of the Bayesian models. Usually, students learning Stan would get to write Stan scripts that are also descriptive of the models. However, we note that among the 7 courses introducing Stan, at least 1 syllabus mentions their use of the brms package (B¨urkner (2017)). This package includes a variety of wrapper functions of Stan, which ask for user’s inputs such as the model formula and prior choices. Compared to writing JAGS or Stan scripts, these wrapper functions overall mimic the Stan script in R syntax. For example, ﬁtting a Bayesian linear regression with the brms package requires inputs similar to those in the lm() R function. For learners who are already proﬁcient in R, these wrapper functions make it possible to ﬁt Bayesian models without having to learn additional syntax. Therefore, we cannot be certain whether each of the 7 courses introducing Stan relies on packages such as brms or actually requires writing Stan scripts. On a related note, 1 course speciﬁcally provides no mention of Stan but highlights the use of the brms package and another Stan-based wrapper package called the rstanarm (Goodrich et al. (2020)). However, the above analysis does not claim that MCMC estimation can only be done using MCMC software such as JAGS or Stan or other packages in undergraduate Bayesian courses. In fact, 1 of the 4 courses which use both JAGS and Stan explicitly states that “The use of software platforms (‘blackbox’), such as ‘jags’, ‘bugs’, and ‘stan’, is permitted only when speciﬁed by the instructions.” We conjecture that this might not be the only course among our collected syllabi that focuses only self-coded MCMC algorithms. In fact, our analysis of Bayesian computing topics in Section 3.2.1 reveals that many courses do introduce MCMC algorithms by self-coding. On this topic, several articles discussed their strategies of writing self-coded MCMC algorithms for simple multi-parameter Bayesian models before moving to MCMC software (Hu (2020), Johnson et al. (2020)). Given the fact that the majority (17 of our 29 syllabi) introduce MCMC estimation software, we believe that at the undergraduate level, instructors prefer MCMC software over self-coded MCMC algorithms. This software-oriented approach deﬁnitely broadens the scope of Bayesian modeling techniques that can be covered in an undergraduate Bayesian course, while still maintaining a reasonably high intensity of Bayesian computing, especially if writing JAGS and / or Stan scripts is expected. Last but not least, 6 syllabi explicitly require the use of R Markdown for students’ assessment, such as preparing homework assignments. This ﬁnding suggests a strong and possibly growing emphasis of reproducibility in statistical analysis, and Bayesian educators are incorporating this tool in their undergraduate courses. Our last part of syllabi analyses is on course assessments. We believe the assessment tools and their grade breakdown highly depend on the instructor, and possibly the institution as well. Nevertheless, analyzing this information provides useful insight into instructors’ choices of course assessments. Our analysis focuses on the types of the assessments, their popularity, and additional useful information presented in the collected syllabi. Table 4 presents details of the top 5 most popular assessment tools. Homework is, without doubt, the most popular assessment tool (every course has a homework component). When it comes to exams, take-home exams seem a common choice, and we note that one instructor explicitly describes the take-home exam as “open book open notes, including data analysis with R.” We believe the popularity of the take-home exam choice reﬂects the instructors’ emphasis on assessing students’ ability to conduct Bayesian data analysis, which usually involves using statistical software and therefore requires the take-home format. As for the variety of project products, formats include (a combination of) a ﬁnal report, a presentation, a proposal, and a poster review. One instructor explicitly opens up the product types to report, or poster, or blog post, or video tutorial, or Shiny apps. These results manifest the instructors’ emphasis on conducting data analysis as the core of the projects in an undergraduate Bayesian course, and their overall balancing of oral presentation and written report in communicating the results. The 4th and the 5th most popular assessment tools are participation and quizzes, respectively. We end our assessment analysis by listing a few unique assessment tools (separate from the aforementioned 5 common assessments): lab reports, article reﬂection, and case studies. It is encouraging to see a variety of assessment tools used by instructors for their undergraduate Bayesian courses, some of which reﬂect the instructors’ beliefs (e.g., the importance of data analysis with statistical software in take-home exams) while others propose fresh perspectives on assessments (e.g., reﬂection of reading articles). Given our ﬁndings in Section 3, we share our vision for the future of undergraduate Bayesian education. We provide 4 broad recommendations, two of which are at the program level and the other two at are the course level. We then share sample weekly schedules for potential Bayesian courses. With Bayesian statistics becoming ever more popular and with the overabundance of data, we expect a higher demand for Bayesian statisticians and data scientists in the workforce and in research. More students, especially those in statistical, data, mathematical, and computer sciences, will need to have access to Bayesian courses in the (near) future. To make Bayesian courses more widely available, we recommend the following for undergraduate programs. 1. Oﬀer an undergraduate course in Bayesian statistics. While this may not be an option for many programs for various reasons, we believe oﬀering a course to students may come in forms diﬀerent from creating a new course. For example, institutions can rely on course-sharing infrastructures from nearby institutions, online course sharing 2. Reduce the number of prerequisites. Statistics educators have been suggesting ﬂatten- 3. Include Bayesian modules as part of existing courses. Programs that are not able to Recommendation 2: Make Bayesian courses a part of the majors 1. Consider making the Bayesian course required for statistics and data science majors. 2. If the Bayesian course is an elective, then make it a highly recommended elective. opportunities (Hu 2019), or credit transfer opportunities. Undergraduate programs should actively search for and create such opportunities, as well as provide students with guidance. ing prerequisites in the statistics curriculum for a while (Cobb 2015) and we believe this applies to Bayesian courses as well. As our study ﬁndings have shown, the number of prerequisites for Bayesian courses varies greatly. In order to make the course accessible to a larger student body, programs need to consider the number of prerequisites. Section 3.1.2 shows many Bayesian courses with fewer prerequisites. We recommend core prerequisites of probability, multivariable calculus, and a statistics course (linear models recommended). Statistical computing is also an essential prerequisite of a Bayesian course. Rather than requiring a full course on computing, programs may consider integrating computing into earlier statistics courses consistent with the recommendations for such courses (Nolan & Temple Lang 2010, Horton 2015, Horton et al. 2015). oﬀer a full course on Bayesian statistics can consider including Bayesian topics as part of other courses. With suﬃcient motivation and foundation building, coupled with appropriate computing tools, a Bayesian module could be introduced at statistics courses at all levels, from the introductory to the advanced. Many students may not know of the importance of Bayesian statistics in their studies. Therefore, it is crucial for programs and advisers to explicitly to recommend the 3. Consider making the Bayesian course an elective for majors beyond the statistical, Recommendation 3: Balance statistics with computing The need for curricular reform in statistics to incorporate computing has been called for by many scholars and educators (Nolan & Temple Lang 2010). In the Bayesian context, our analyses in Section 3 have shown that many courses embrace computing and statistics simultaneously. Given our ﬁndings, we have the following recommendations for balancing statistics with computing in a Bayesian course. 1. Introduce simulation-based learning early in the course. Take the opportunity to 2. Encourage students to write self-coded MCMC algorithms for relatively simple multi- 3. If the course puts equal emphasis on computing and modeling, consider adopting one Bayesian course. For instance, if a mathematics and statistics major program recommends any upper-level math course as an elective, students may not necessarily know the diﬀerence in choosing between a Bayesian or a geometry course. Therefore, programs should explicitly state that the Bayesian course is highly recommended. mathematical, and computational sciences. As our ﬁndings on major disciplines in Section 3.1 suggest, Bayesian courses can be part of many programs, such as economics, psychology, business, and biology, especially for quantitative concentrations within these programs. compare and contrast simulation-based inference (e.g., Monte Carlo simulation) and analytical solutions when introducing conjugate models. parameter models. Provide ample sample scripts for students to practice their statistical programming skills. of the popular probabilistic programming languages for Bayesian model estimation through MCMC (e.g., JAGS and Stan). Clearly illustrate the purpose of each coding component and how it connects to important MCMC topics, including MCMC diagnostics. Emphasize on posterior summary and inference. Provide ample sample scripts for students to get familiarized with the syntax. 4. If the course has a slightly stronger emphasis on modeling over computing, consider Recommendation 4: Use a variety of assessments While some assessment tools are certainly more popular than others, our biggest takeaway from our assessment analysis in Section 3.2.3 is to use a variety of assessments. We present our speciﬁc recommendations below. 1. Include a data analysis portion in a homework assignment and in an exam. This 2. Include a course project component in course assessments. Make it open-ended and 3. Include formative assessments such as quizzes (low to no-grade contribution) to get 4. Be creative with assessment tools: Open-ended case studies allow students to work on 5. In addition to lectures, use real data in every assessment when possible. introducing one of the wrapper packages for Stan for its simpler posterior summary procedure (e.g., rstanarm and brms). The rest of the recommendation follows number 3 above. practice helps emphasize the importance of Bayesian computing and adequately assess students’ learning and programming skills. allow students to freely explore their interests. Encourage varied presentation styles, such as report, oral presentation, and video tutorial, to name a few. Provide guidance throughout the process. students to do drill and practice exercises. Such short assessments provide an opportunity for retention of new terminology and getting familiar with new notation. new models in new contexts; reading and discussing accessible journal articles build students’ conﬁdence and enhance their ability of conducting research; computing labs allow students further practice their programming skills. Interested readers can refer to Section 3 of Hu (2020) for details of these approaches in an undergraduate Bayesian course. To help aspiring Bayesian educators get started with creating a new course, we provide two sample schedules. These sample schedules are designed based on the analysis of topics by areas reported in Section 3.2.1. Our recommended topics in the sample schedules are selected based on their popularity, also discussed in Section 3.2.1. Table 5 lists the two sample schedules side by side. The sample schedule for a 10-week course spends 3 weeks on foundations of Bayesian inference, 4 weeks on Bayesian computing, and the remaining 3 weeks on Bayesian modeling. Depending on the learning objectives, instructors can choose to shorten the number of weeks on computing and lengthen that on modeling, especially if the course has an applied focus. One topic that requires special attention in the 10-week schedule is model evaluation (comparison and selection) which is an important aspect of Bayesian modeling. It is Table 5: Sample weekly schedules for 10- and 14-week academic terms especially crucial if ﬁnal projects are assigned as students would need rigorous methods for ﬁnalizing their model. Therefore, it is important that instructors emphasize model evaluation throughout the course, starting with predictive checks early on then also utilizing predictive checks for linear regression, hierarchical, and logistic regression models. For the sample schedule of a 14-week course, we include the area of additional topics, where the instructors can mix and match from the identiﬁed additional topics presented in Section 3.2.1. In the sample schedule, we include the topics of the highest popularity, and instructors should delete and add as they see ﬁt. For example, if students in the course have prior exposure to frequentist inference, then comparing Bayesian inference to frequentist inference for common models, such as linear regression, would undoubtedly be a suitable additional topic. The aforementioned emphasis on model evaluation throughout the course also applies to the 14-week schedule. With the advances of computing and emergence of data science, we expect the demand for statisticians and data scientists trained in Bayesian statistics to be growing. Undergraduate programs need to prepare to meet this demand. In this paper, we provide an overview of current practices in undergraduate programs and Bayesian courses. We also give several recommendations, some at the program level while others at the course level, as a guide to new courses that undergraduate programs may develop. Moreover, two weekly sample schedules are proposed given the popularity of topics analyzed from the collected syllabi. Any study with data, especially the ones with data collected from college and university websites, comes with its own set of limitations, which sets the parameters of our reported results and conclusions. First, our primary goals were identifying how common Bayesian courses are and understanding the content of these oﬀered courses. To achieve these goals, we avoided random sampling of institutions and instead chose to examine programs and courses at highly ranked institutions, with the assumption that they are more likely to oﬀer Bayesian courses given their resources. Therefore, it is possible that Bayesian courses are less common in undergraduate programs than what we have reported here. In addition, recall that there were a number of Bayesian courses cross-listed between graduate and undergraduate programs. Given the limited available information, it was not possible to evaluate the appropriateness of these courses speciﬁcally for undergraduate learners. Another interest of ours was understanding whether students graduating from undergraduate programs, especially those in statistical, mathematical, computer, and data sciences have access to Bayesian courses. We were able to count how many institutions oﬀer these courses in the sample we have examined. However, more students from diﬀerent institutions might have access to undergraduate Bayesian courses through less common opportunities. Although we have not formally tracked all such possibilities, we have encountered and reported several examples of course sharing infrastructures where students in one institution can take a class in another institution. There may be more such course sharing practices that we do not know. We were also interested in understanding to which majors Bayesian courses count towards. One limitation in identifying majors was that some majors may count the Bayesian course towards the major but may not necessarily list it as an explicit elective. For instance, if a quantitative economics program counts any statistics courses with a label 400 and above towards the major, we may have missed it in our study. Such information would have been nearly impossible to track. In addition, our main data source was institution websites including department web pages, course catalogs, and course pages. We had to use a fair use of human judgment in understanding course titles, especially for some courses whose titles and descriptions are diﬀerent from the courses that we are used to seeing in statistics programs. Moreover, for a few courses, some information on the web could be outdated or incomplete. For instance, when we were tracking prerequisites, only a few of the prerequisites mentioned statistical software. However, we know from our own experience that even at the introductory level, statistical software are often adopted. Therefore, it is possible that computing prerequisites for Bayesian courses might be more common than what is reported in our ﬁndings. An important note we would like to make is that we both teach our own Bayesian courses and have our own textbooks with undergraduates as the main targeted audience. With a few years of experience in teaching the subject, we have our own views on how and what should be taught in Bayesian statistics. However, everything we report here, including the subsequent recommendations, is based on the courses and syllabi we examined in the study. We tried our best to remove any bias we may have from our own teaching experiences. Last but not least, we invite current and future Bayesian educators to join the undergraduate Bayesian education network undergraduate Bayesian education. We include the additional topics identiﬁed from our syllabi analysis in Table 6. We group them into the three general areas: 1) Foundations of Bayesian inference, 2) Bayesian computing, and 3) Bayesian modeling. We note that some topics can be classiﬁed into more than one area. The table contains information of the required and recommended textbooks collected from the syllabi analysis. The column “Required” shows the number of courses (out of 29) requiring the textbook while the column “Recommended” shows the number of courses recommending the textbook.