Group-13 elements are a promising candida tes fo r accurate optical atomic clocks as they are offer low fraction al frequency errors [1–5]. It is to be m entioned that, the recent experiments, Refs. [6, 7 ], on Aloptical atomic clock have achieved a low fractional frequency error of 9.4×10[6, 7] which is, perhaps, the most accurate clock in existence today. The electric dipole polarizability, α, of an atom or ion is a key parameter in estimating the accuracy of an atom ic c lock. It is used to estimate the blackbody radiation (BBR) shift, one of the dom inant environment induced frequency shifts, in the transition frequenc ie s o f ato ms and ions due to ac Stark effect. Since th e measurement of α for individual states is nontrivial [8], accurate values from precision theory calculations play a crucia l role in the development of new frequency and time standards for atom ic clocks. The other potential implications of α include, discrete symmetry violations in atoms and ions [9, 10], condensates of dilute atomic gases [ 11–13], highharmonic generation and ultrafast processes [14–17], and the search for the variation in the fundamental constants [18, 19]. In this work, w e have employed a Fock-space pe rturbed relativistic coupled-cluster (FS-PRCC) theory to compute the properties o f one-valence atomic systems in the external perturbations. We employ this metho d to compute the α for the ground state,P, and the spin-orbit (SO)-splitted excited state,P, of Al and In. In the literature, α fo rPand Pstates of Al and In have been calculated using different methods [20–25], including the coupled-cluster based methods like ours. One common trend in the reported data is, however, a large variation in the α values. For example, forP state of Al, there is a difference of ≈ 10% in th e smallest [20] and the largest [25] reported α values. The same trend is also observed in the exper imental values [26–29]. The recent experiment [27] reports ≈ 20% larger α than Ref. [26] for Al. It is to be emphasized that, unlike the closed-shell and B. K. Mani atomic systems, calculation of α for an open-shell system is a challenging task and requires the inclusion of core-core, core-valence and valence-valence electrons correlations to the highest level of accuracy. Moreover, the inclusion of correlation effects from Breit in te raction and QED corrections and the large basis sets are essential to tune the a ccuracy further. The aim of the present work is to ﬁll this gap. We aim to: develop a Fock-space relativistic coupled-cluster ( FS-RCC) theory based method to accu rately account for an external perturbation in the pro perties calculation of one-valence atomic systems; compute the accurate value of α for Al and In; and quantify the various electron correlation effects embedded in the α of Al and In. To test the accur acy of the wavefunctions, we h ave calculated to excitation energies of few low-lying states of Al and In using RCC theory. RCC is one of the most powerful m anybody theories for atomic stru c ture calculatio ns. It accounts for the electron correlation to all-orders of residual Coulomb interaction, and has been used to calculate a pleth ora of properties in atomic systems. The implementation of such a theory and a FORTRAN code for the properties calculations of closed-shell and one-valence atomic systems without external pertu rbation is repo rted in our previous work [30]. For the prope rties calculation in the presence of external pe rturbation, we had reported a perturbed relativistic coupled-cluster (PRCC) theory for closed-shell in the works [31, 32] and re ferences th e rein. One of the key me rits of PRCC is th at it does not employ the sum-over-state [33, 34] approach to incorporate the effects of a perturbation. The summation over all the possible interme diate states is subsum ed in the perturbed cluster operators. Due to important prospects associated with α, it has been computed using a variety of oth e r many-body m e thods in the literature. The recent review article by Mitroy et al. [35] provides a summary of α for several atoms and ions computed using different methods. The other refe rence which we found very useful is the Schwerdtfeger’s u pdated table of α for neutral atoms [36]. The table provides an exhau stive list of references on experimental and theoretical values of α for several neutr al atoms. The remaining part of the paper is organized into ﬁve sections. I n Sec. II, we discussed the RCC and PRCC theories for one-valence atomic systems where we derive the PRCC equations and also discuss in detail the con tributing diagrams to each terms. In Sec. III, we discuss the calculation of α using PRCC theory. Here, we provide some dominant diagrams contributing to α. The ba sis set convergence and other calculational details are discussed in Sec. IV of the paper. In Sec. V, we analyze and present our results of excitation energy and dipole polarizability. Unless stated otherwise, all the results and equations presented in this paper are in atomic units (~ = m= e = 1/4πǫ= 1). The many-electron ground state wavefunction of an onevalence atom or ion in the RCC theory is expressed as where |Φi is the one-valence Dirac-Fock (DF) reference state, and is obtained by adding an electron to the closed-shell referenc e state, |Φi = a|Φi. The operators Tand S are the coupled cluster (CC) operators which act within the Hilbert spaces of the closed -shell and open- shell systems, respectively. The gr ound state |Ψi is the solution of the eigenvalue equation where His the Dirac-Coulomb-Breit no-virtual-pair Hamiltonian and Eis the exact energy of the one-valence system. For an atom with N -electrons, His where α and β are the Dirac matrices, and V(r) is the nuclear poten tial. And , the last two terms, 1/rand g(r), are the Coulomb and Breit interactions, respectively. The effects of the negative-energy continuum states are avoided by emp loying a kinetically balanced ﬁnite Gaussian basis [37, 38]. In the RCC theory, the single and double excitations incorporate most of the e lectron correlation effects and provide a good de scription of the pro perties. Therefore, we can approximate T= T+ Tand S= S+ S, which is referred to as the coupled-cluster with singles and doubles (CCSD) approximation. These operators in the second q uantized notation are Here, the indices ab . . . and pq . . . represent the core and virtual orbitals, respec tively. And, tand sare the cluster amplitudes of the T and S operators, respec tively. These closedshell and one-valence operators are o btained by solving a set of coupled nonlinear equations and details a re discussed in our previous works [30, 39, 40]. In the Ref. [30], we have provided descriptions of the computa tional implementation of RCC theory for the properties calculations of the closed-shell and one-valence systems without an externa l perturbation. In th e presence of an external perturbation, the wavefunction and the energy of the system are modiﬁed. For the electric dipole polarizability, the perturbation is du e to the interaction b etween the externa l electric ﬁeld Eand the in duced electric dipole moment of the sy stem D. And, the interaction Hamiltonia n is H= −D · E. We refer the modiﬁed eigenstate as the perturbed eigenstate, |˜Ψi, an d the mo diﬁed energy as the perturbed energy,˜E. In the PRCC theory, |˜Ψi is expressed as where, λ is the perturbation parameter. The operators T and Sare referred to as the perturbed closed-shell an d one valence cluster operators, respectively, and both are rank one operators. The operator Tis obtained by solving a set of coupled pertur bed equations with in th e Hilbert space of the occupied electron s. The details o n its tensor representation and the PRCC equations a re discussed in our previous work s on the dipole polarizability of the closed-shell atomic systems [31, 41]. So, here, we discuss only the tensor rep resentation and PRCC equations of the o pen shell clu ster o perator S. FIG. 1. Diagrammatic representations of T, T, Sand S perturbed cluster operators. Similar to the case of Tand Soperators, in the CCSD approximation, we take S= S+ S. And , these in the second quantized notations, Here, ξrepresents the cluster amplitude for the operator S. The one-body operator Sis an od d parity operator and expressed in terms of a rank-one C-tensor. It satisﬁes the o rbital-parity and orbital-trian gular selection rules, (−1)= −1 and |j− j| 6 1 6 (j+ j), respectively. Th e tensor structure of the two-body operator S involves two C-tensors with ranks l and k associated with its two-vertices. These two C-tenso rs are coupled to give a rank-one operator, S. The allowed orbital-parity and and orbital-triangular selectio ns rules for Sare, (−1)= −(−1)and |j− j| 6 l 6 (j+ j), |j− j| 6 k 6 (j+ j), respectively. The diagrammatic representations of Tand Sare shown in the Fig.1. Using th e deﬁnition of the norma l ordered Hamiltonian, H= H− hΦ|H|Φi, and dropping Efor simplicity from both sides of the equ ation, we can write where, ∆E, = E−hΦ|H|Φi is the correlation ene rgy of one-valence atom . And,¯H, = eHe, is a similarity tran sf ormed Hamiltonian. Using the Wick’s theorem, it Here, Eis the attac hment energy of the valence electron and is expressed as E= ǫ+ ∆E, where ǫis the singleparticle energy. In deriving these equations we have used the relations, hΦ|T|Φi = 0 and hΦ|TS|Φi = 0, as they do not contribute, where ∗ represents the single and doubly excited determinant. We solve these coupled nonlinear equations using the Jaco bi method. To remedy the slow convergence of this method we employ direct inversion of the iterated subspace (DIIS) [42]. The Eqs. (11a) and (11b) contain all the CC terms associated with the PRCC equa tions of the one-valence system. And, therefore, provides an accurate description of the prop- In analogy with the Eq. (2), |˜Ψi is the solutio n of the eigenvalue equation here, within the ﬁrst-order time-independent perturbation theory, the perturbed energy˜E≡ Eas th e ﬁrst-order correction vanishes due to the odd parity nature of H. Using Eq. (5) in th e eigenvalue equation (7) and by opera ting with e from left, retaining the terms ﬁrst ord er in λ, we get By projecting Eq. (9) with singly and doubly-excited determinants, hΦ| and hΦ|, respec tively, and using the Wicks’s theorem to remove th e disconnec ted te rms, we obtain the PRCC coupled equations for singles and doubles a s erties of the sy stem. However, solving these equations is computationally expe nsive due to the large number of many-body diagrams arising fr om the contractions with multiple CC operators. One simple a pproach to mitigate this is to retain terms which are linear in the CC operators. And, this also provides reliable results a s in most of the cases the contribution from the nonlinear term s is small. So, retaining the terms linear in CC operators, we can write Eqs. (11a) and (11b) as We refer to these equations as the linearized perturbed coupled -cluster (LPRCC) equations. The LPRCC incorporates all the important many-body effects like rando m-phase approximation and provides a good description of the onevalence atomic or ionic properties in the presence of perturbation. To solve the coupled -cluster amplitude Eqs.(11a) a nd (11b), we have to evaluate all the possible terms arising from each of the matrix elements in the equations. There are several terms and the book keeping is simpliﬁed with the many-bo dy Goldstone diagra mmatic approach. In this section we describe the Goldsto ne diagrams arising from the matrix elem ents and these are evaluated manua lly. I t is, however, p ossible to identify diagrams computationally as well [43]. We have adopted the manual approach for the convenience in evaluating the angular factors. For simplicity, from here onwards, as it should be the case for α, we use D in place of H. For the one-valence system, from the deﬁnition of the similarity transformed Hamiltonian in Eq. (10), using the CSSD approximation we get The terms with two or h igher orders of Tdo not contribute to the PRCC equation for one-vale nce system . The ﬁrst term, D, is the bare dipole op e rator and contributes to the equation of S. The two remaining terms represent the contraction with the unpertur bed operator Tand contribute to the PRCC equations of the Sand S, respectively. In to ta l, there are 3 diagrams from¯D, and these are shown in Fig.2. Using the algebr a of evaluating the Goldstone d ia grams [44], we can write the algebraic expre ssions of the diagrams a s respectively. Here, in atomic units D ≡ −r and r= hi|r|ji is the electronic part of the single -particle matrix element of the dipole operator. And, h· · · iand h· · · irepresent the matrix elements hΦ| · · · |Φi and hΦ| · · · |Φi, respectively. Like the ﬁrst term, consider the second term in Eqs.(11a) and (11b). Expanding the similarity transformed operator¯D in terms of T, we can write FIG. 2. Single and double PRCC diagrams contributing to the term ¯D of Eqs. (11a) and (11b), respectively. FIG. 3. Single and double PRCC diagrams contributing to the term ¯DSof PRCC Eqs. (11a) and (11b), respectively. The terms having higher than two orders of CC operators do not contribute. The ﬁrst three term s in the above equation contribute to the PRCC equation of Sand leads to 4 diagrams. The diagrams are shown in Fig.3(a-d). Except for the ﬁrst term, all the other terms contribute to the PRCC equation of S. In total there are 6 diagrams from th e se terms and these are shown in Fig .3(e-j). The corresponding alg ebraic expressions are This term is an important one in PRCC theory as it subsumes the many-body effects of the core-polarization. Unlike the previous two terms where the dipole operator appears explicitly, in this term, the effects of the perturbation is embedded in a rank one operator, T. We can expand this FIG. 4. Single PRCC diagrams contributing to the term¯HTof Eq. (11a). This term involves one each of the perturbed and unperturbed CC operators Tand S, r espectively. And, the term contributes to th e non linear PRCC equation. By expanding¯H, we obtain Consider ﬁrst the PRCC equation of the S. Only the ﬁrst two terms contribute. The PRCC diagrams from these terms are obtained by invoking all the possible contractions between the Hand CC operators. There are 8 diagrams and these a re shown in Fig.4. We do not consid er the diagrams arising from the one-body pa rt of H. These do not con tribute as we use Dirac-Fock orbitals in our calculations. Th e algebraic expression of these diagrams are given in Eq.(18b). In the equation, grepresents the matrix element hij|1/r+ g(r)|kli and ˜g, = (g− g), is an antisymmetric matrix element. In the PRCC equation of S, all the terms contribute and leads to 29 diagr ams. These diagrams are shown in Fig.5. Like in the case of S, we do not include the diag rams from the one-body part of the H. The algebraic expression of these diagrams are given in the Eq.(18b). In the equation we see the emergen ce of a trend. The number of terms in this equation far exceed those in S. This trend is there in the remaining non-linear terms as well. The higher order ter ms will not contribute. As to be expected, several diagrams arise from this term due to various possible contractions between Hand CC operators. For the PRCC equation of S, there are 14 diagrams from this term. And, these are are shown in the left panel of Fig .6. The algebraic expressions of these diagrams a re given in Eq.(20). In the case of the PRCC equation for S, there are 72 Goldstone diagrams arise from this term. Out of these, 36 diagrams each arise from the ﬁr st and second term s. These diagram s are shown in the le ft and right panels, respectively, of the Fig.7. The algebraic expression of the diagrams in the left pane l is given in Eq.(21). Sim ilarly, the algebraic expression of the diagrams in the right panel is given in Eq.(22). This te rm contain s a perturbed operator, S, which subsumes dominant effects of perturbation for one-valence atomic systems. Expanding¯H In th e PRCC equation of S, both the one- and two-body CC operators from the ﬁrst and second terms contribute. From the third te rm, h owever, only the term HTTScontributes. There are 15 diagrams with contribute to the PRCC equation of S, and these are shown in the right panel of Fig. 6. The algebraic expression of these diagrams is given in the Eq.(24). For the PRCC equation of S, there are in total 59 diagrams. Out of these 29 diagrams arise from the ﬁrst two terms. And, these diagrams are shown in the left panel of the Fig.8. The remaining 30 diagrams arise from the third term, and are shown in the righ t pane l of the Fig. 8. The algebraic expression of diagrams in the left an d right panels a re given in Eqs. (25) and (26), respectively. S(panel (a)) and¯HS(panel (b)) of Eq. (11a). (left panel) and HTTS(right panel) of Eq. (11b). The terms on the right-hand sides of the PRCC Eqs.(11a) and (11b) are referre d to as the renormalization terms in the CC equation of the one-valence systems. It is an important term, and its nonzero value distinguishes the PRCC equations of open-shell systems from the c losed-shell systems. The se contribute through the folded diagrams arising from the contraction of the ene rgy with the CC operators. This contraction is not possible in the case of closed- shell sy stems as the energy diagrams do not have free line s. Folded diagr ams contributing to Eqs. (11a) and (11b) are given in Fig. 9 as d ia grams (a) and (b), respectively. In the PRCC, the electric dipole polarizability α of an atom or ion is d eﬁned as the expectation of the dipole operato r with respect to the perturbe d state |˜Ψi. For the one -valence atomic system Here, the terms SDT+ H.c., TDS+ H.c. and DT+ H.c. are not included as these do not contribute to Using the expression of |˜Ψi from Eq. (5) and retaining only the terms with ﬁrst-order in λ, w e g et where N = hΦ|(e(1 + S))(e(1 + S))|Φi, (29) is the n ormalization factor of the eige nstate |Ψi and¯D, = eDe, is a dressed operator, which is a no nterminating series of the cluster operator T. In the present work, however, we consider up to to the second o rder term ¯D = D + DT+ TD + TDT. The higher order terms in Thave negligible contributions and this has been conﬁrmed through de tailed computations [40]. In the CCSD approximation, Eq. (28) can be written as the α of the one-va lence system. FIG. 8. Double PRCC diagrams contributing to the terms HS+HT FIG. 9. Folded diagrams contributing t o PRCC Eqs. (11a) (diagram (a)) and (11b) (diagram (b)). There are 128 Goldstone diagrams which contribute to the Eq. (30). And as example of the diagrams, in Fig. 10, we show one diagram from each of the terms in the Eq. (30). The diagrams from the Hermitian conjugate terms are, however, not shown as the se are topologically equivalent. Among all the terms in the Eq. (30), the ﬁrst four terms, DS, DS and their hermitian conjugates, are expected to have th e dominant contribution. The reason for this is the large m agnitude of the one-valence cluster operators and the strong effect of the perturbation on these operators. More importantly, the terms S(left panel) and HTTS(right panel) of Eq. (11b). DS+H.c. subsumes the contributions from the Dirac-Fock (DF) and the random-phase-approximation ( RPA). The diagrams of the DSand DSare shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), respectively. Among the terms with two-orders of CC operators, SDS, SDS, SDS, SDSand their H.c., are expected to give dominant contributions. The example diagrams of these four terms are shown in the Fig.10(c-f). The next important contributions are expected from the terms with one each of the T and S operators; SDT, SDT, SDT, TDS, TDS, TDSand their H.c., and DTSand DTS. The representative diagrams from these terms are shown in Fig.10(g-n). The remaining terms, DT, their H.c., having two-orders of closed-shell operator, are expected to have the lowest contribution to α. This is due to the small magnitudes of these operators for the open-shell systems. Some representative diagrams from these are shown in Fig.10(o-s). FIG. 10. Some example polarizability diagrams for one-valence atomic system, contributing to Eq. (30) A basis set which provid es a go od d escription of the singleelectron wave fun ctions and energies is essential to obtain accurate and reliable results using the PRCC theory. In this work, we have used Gaussian-type orbitals ( G TOs) [37] as the single-electron basis set. To ensu re the accuracy of the basis set, the basis parameters are optimized to matc h the orbital energies as well as the self-consistent-ﬁeld energies with the GRASP2K [45] results. We achieved an excellent agreement between the GTO and GRASP2K e nergies. A detailed analysis and comparison of the e nergies of the gro up-13 elemen ts is reported in our recent work [31]. To improve the quality of the basis set further, w e incorporate the effects o f Breit interaction, vacuum polarization (VP) and the self-energy (SE) corrections in the basis set generation. For the Breit interaction, we employ the expression given in Ref. [46] and incorporate it at the level of orbital basis as well as the PRCC calculations. The effects of the vacuum polarization is considered using the Uehling potential [47], modiﬁed to incorporate the ﬁnite size effects of nucleus [48]. The self-energy corrections to the orbitals a re incorporated through the model Lamb-shif t operator introdu ced by Shabaev et al. [49], and w ere calculate d using TABLE I. Convergence trend of α calculated using the DiracCoulomb Hamiltonian as function of basis size. the code QEDMOD [50]. Owing to the mathematically incomplete n ature of the GTO basis [51], it is essential to check the convergence of pro perties with the basis size. In Table I, we demonstrate the convergence of α fo r Al and In by listing α for both the ﬁne structure states as a function of the basis size. For these calculation s we have used the Dirac-Cou lomb (DC) Hamiltonian as using th e DCB Hamiltonian is computationally more expensive. As evident from the table, to achieve the convergence of α, we star t with a mode rate basis size by consid ering up to the h symmetry. And, then systematically increase the number o f or bitals in each symmetry until the change in α is 6 10a.u. For example, in the case of Al, the change in α is 2×10a.u. when the basis set is augmented from 175 to 181 orbitals. So, we consider the basis set with the 175 orb itals as the optimal set and use it in further calculations to incorpo rate the effects of the Breit interaction and QED corrections. The same approach is also adopted to achieve the convergence of excitatio n e nergies, however, with a key difference. In this case, the basis set includes orbitals from j-symmetry also. The convergence trends of the excitation energies and α a re shown in the Fig. 11 (a) and (b), respectively. As discernible from the ﬁgure, both the excitation energy and α converge well with the basis size. The excitation en ergy of a state |Ψi is deﬁned as where Eis the energy of the ground state wavefunction, and obtained from the solution of Eq. (2) for 3pand 5p states for Al and In, respectively. And, Eis the energy of an TABLE II. Energy (cm) of the ground state and the excitation energies of low-lying atomic states of Al and In. excited state |Ψi. In the RCC, Eis given by [40] where |Φi is an excited Dirac-Fock state. In the TableII, we have listed the en ergy of the grou nd state and the excitation energies of a few low-lying states of Al and In. For comparison, the experimental values from NIST [52] are also listed in the table. For Al, o ur theoretical results are in excellent agreement with the experime ntal data for all states. The maximum relative error is 0.26%, in the case of 3pstate. For In also we observe the same trend of relative errors except for the state 5p, where the error is 9%. This could be attributed to the correlation effects from higher energy conﬁgurations not included in the present work due to divergence issues. To discern the electron correction effects as a function of conﬁgurations inc luded in the computations, ene rgies are computed with different conﬁguration spaces in steps. For this we start with the grou nd state conﬁguration in the conﬁguration space and include the higher energy co nﬁgurations in subsequent steps. For Al, we start with 3s3p a nd refer to this as CF1. Then, we include two conﬁgurations 3s4s and 3s4p in two subsequent calc ulations (CF2 and CF3), respectively. The inclusion of the conﬁguration 3s3d, however, leads to the divergence in the FSRCC computations du e to small energy denominator, and henc e, we do not compute the excitation energy of 3d. For In, 5s5p (CF1) is the starting conﬁguration and the excited state conﬁgurations 5s6s, 5s6p and 5s5d are in cluded in the later computations with conﬁguration spaces identiﬁed as CF2, CF3 and CF4, respectively. The trend of contributions from the higher energy conﬁguration s to the ground state energies of Al and I n is shown in the Fig.11(c). As we observe from the ﬁgure, for both the atoms, the relative error decreases with the inclusion of higher energy conﬁgurations. The reason for this is attr ibuted to the better inclusion of the core-valence and valence-valence correlations with larger conﬁguration space. FIG. 11. Convergence of excitation energies (panel (a)) and dipole polarizability (panel (b)) as function of basis size for Al. Percentage change i n the ground state energies of Al and In, panel (c). Difference in the α values of spin-orbit splitted st at es,PandP, of Al and In. We list the value of α for ground state,P, and SOcoupled excited state,P, in the Tables III and IV, respectively. For comparison we have also listed the other theoretical and experimental results from previous works. The results listed as PRCC are using the DC Hamilton ia n and the converged ba ses with orb itals 25s25p16d13f1 1g 10h and 26s26 p21d13f12g11h for Al and In , respectively. And, the results listed as PRCC+Breit+QED incorporate the effects of Breit and QE D corre c tions. The values listed as estimated refers to the value afte r incorporating the estimated contributions fr om the i, j and k-symmetry orbitals. To quantify the effects of electron correlatio ns f rom the nonlinear terms in the PRCC, the contributions from the DF and LPRCC are provided separately. From the tables, we observe three important trends in the DF, LPRCC and PRCC α values for Al and In . First, except for thePstate of In, the LPRCC values are smaller than the DF values. This could be attributed to the contraction of the core with the inclusion of correlation effects within the LPRCC. Second, for both the atoms the PRCC values are larger than the DF. This is due to the contribution of electron correlations from the nonlinear terms. On close examination, we ﬁnd that the nonlinear terms with one each of the perturbed and unpertu rbed CC operators, viz,HTSand HTS, contribute the most. And third, the difference between α of the ﬁne-structure states, α, of In is more than three times larger than Al. This is shown in the Fig.11(d). The reason for this could be the larger difference in the radial FIG. 12. Trend of contributions to α from virtual orbitals for Al (panels (a) and (b)) and In (panels (c) and (d)) as basis is augmented. TABLE III. The ﬁnal value of α (a.u.) forPfrom our calculations compared with the other theory and experimental results. extents of th ePandPstates in In. In the DF com putations, hri− hri= 0.138 a.u. for In, however, it is only 0.007 a.u. for Al. ForPof Al, there are two experimental results of α. However, there is a large difference between the reported values. The latest experimental r esult of α given in the Ref. [27] is ≈ 20% larger than the previous result reported in the Ref. [26]. In addition, there is sig niﬁcant difference in the experimental errors. The measurement in Ref. [27] has an experimental error of ≈ 10%, whereas in the Ref. [26] it is ≈ 4%. Our recommended value, 5 8.70, is ≈ 6% larger than the Ref. [27]. From the previous theoretical studies, there are ﬁve results for comparison. These include two coupledcluster results, similar to method we have employed in the present work. However, with a key difference in the calculation of α: the two previous works used ﬁnite-ﬁeld method. Like in the exp erimental results, here as well, there is a variation in the reported values. There is a difference of about 10% between the lowest [20] and the high e st [25] reported values. Although Refs. [20] and [22] adopt the same quantum many-body method, the value in Ref. [22] is larger tha n Ref. [20]. Our PRCC value, 58.27, is in good agree ment with the CCSD(T) calculations, Refs. [23] and [24], and SI-SOCI result [22]. Our recommended value, 58.7 0, is on the higher side of these results. The reason fo r this is attributed to the inclusion of the contributions from the Breit and QED corrections and the large basis sets in our calculations. The DF value For In also there are two experimental results f or gro und state and, like Al, they d iffer by large amount – the r ecent measurement by molecular-beam e le ctric deﬂection technique [29] is about 10.6 % larger value than the Ref. [28]. Our recommended value, 6 4.23, lies between the two re sults. Among the previous calculations, in terms of m ethods adopted, the calculations by Borschevsky et al. [21] and Safronova et al. [53] are closed to ours. Considering the error bars, our recom mended value, 64.23, is in good agreement with these calculations. Th e reason for a small difference could be attributed to the basis set difference and the contributions from the Breit and QED corrections. The other two results are using the CI based calculations. Th e result, 66.4, from Ref. [22] is the largest among all the results and differ by abou t 8% from the smallest value 61.5, Ref. [20]. Unlike thePstate, the static dipole polarizability forPstate will also have the contributions fro m the anisotropy components associated with ma gnetic quantum numbers M= ±3/2 and ±1/2. In Tab leIV, we have tabulated the average value, ¯α, of the polarizability. On close examination of the results, we observe three important differences in the trend of electron c orrelations in co mparison to Pstate. First, for both the atoms, the DF and LPRCC values are very close to each other. This indicates the less contraction of the core orbitals with the inclusion of the electron correlations. Second, the perc entage contribution from the nonlinear terms in PRCC is less thanP. And third, the overall Breit+QED correction has increased two-fo ld. To the best of our knowledge, for both the atoms, there is no data on α from the experiments forP. And, from the previous calculations, there ar e few data from relativistic calculations which are listed in the table. In Refs. [20] and [21], a coupled- cluster m e thod is employed to obtain the energy of Al and In, respectively, and then α is calculated using the TABLE I V. The value of ¯α(p) (a.u.) from our calculations compared with the other theory and experimental results. ﬁnite-ﬁeld approac h. In Ref. [22], however, a conﬁguration interaction method is combin e d with ﬁnite-ﬁled approach to calculate the α for In. For Al, our LPRCC result is within the error bars o f the Refs. [20, 21]. Our recommended value, 64.69, is however larger than both the references. The reason for this is attributed to the large correlation effects from nonlinear terms in the PRCC theory. A sizable combined contribution from Breit+QED is also observed. The same trend of comparison with previous results is also observed for In. Here, however, th ere is a variation in the previous results and associated theoretical uncertainties. Our recommend value, 82.50, is within the error bar of the Ref. [22]. Next, we analyze and present the different electron correlations effects inc orporated in the calculations of α. For this, we separate the expression in Eq . (30) into six different terms and give their contributions in the TableV. As evident from the table, for both the atoms, the leading order (LO) term is SD + H.c. The contribution f rom the L O term is ≈ 146%(1 38%) and ≈ 141%(131%) of the PRCC value for theP(P) state of Al and In, respectively. That is, the contribution from the LO term exceeds the total value. This is expected as it incorpora te s the results from the DF term and core-polarization (CP) effects. Except for thePof Al, the next leading order (NLO) term is SDS+ H .c. It c ontributes ≈ −10.6%(−6.5%) and −13.6%(−1 0.8%) for the P(P) state of Al and In, respectively. For the next to NLO contribution, the terms SDS+ H.c. and TD + H.c. give near ly equal contributions. Like the NLO term, the contributions from these terms are opposite in phase to the LO contribution, and hence, reduces the total value of α. It is to be mentioned here that the contributions from the core- TABLE V. Contributions to α (a.u.) from different terms in PRCC theory f or Al and In. SDS−9.1048 −5.7448 −12.2584 −11.7265 FIG. 13. The DF (diagram (a)), CP (diagrams (b) and (c)) and VC (diagram (d)) terms subsumed in DS. electrons to α are im portant. This is unlike the properties of one-valence systems w ithout an external perturbation like the electromag netic transitions. T his is reﬂected in the c ontribution from the term TD + H.c. for both the atoms. To gain insights on the dominant contributions from the virtual orbitals, we compute α using basis sets with selective addition of orbitals in d, f and g-symmetries. And, the results are plotted in the Fig.12. For Al the dominant contribution, as discernible from the ﬁgure, is f rom the d-virtual orbitals. A similar trend in Alwas reported in our previous work [31]. The same trend is also observed for In , however, with a key difference. In this case the f -orbitals also contribute. And, this is consistent with the trend reported in our prev ious work [31] where the f-virtual electrons were found to have dom inant contribution due to strong dipolar mixing with the coreelectrons in the 4d orbital. To quantify the orbital wise contributions, we identify the dominant cluster amplitudes which contribute to the LO term DS+ H.c. As discernible from the Fig.14, for Al, at 40.9%(36.6%) the cluster operators with the vir tual orbital 3d(3d) has the largest contribution to theP(P) polarizability. This is due to the strong dipolar m ixing between the 3p and 3d orbitals. The second largest contribution is observed from the cluster amplitudes with the 4s virtual orbital, th e contr ibution is ≈ 2 5.3%(24.6%) for the FIG. 14. Five largest percentage contributions to DS+ H.c. for PandPstates of Al ( panel (a)) and In (panel (b)). The percentage contributions from DF, CP and VC for Al (panel (c)) and In (panel (d)). are from the 4d, 8d and 7d virtual o rbitals, and tog ether they contribute ≈ 22.15% (20.18%) for theP(P) state. A similar trend is also observed in th e case of In, where the ﬁrst two dominant contributions are from the 5d and 6s-orbitals. They contribute ≈ 38.7%(35. 6%) and 25. 6%(27.6%), respectively, for theP(P) state. In contrast to Al, the third and fourth dominant contributions are of the same order and different d-electrons contribute toPandPstates. 2. Core polarization, valence-virtual correlation and QED effects Next we assess the contributions from core polarization and pair corr elation effects to α of Al and In. The term DSsubsumes the contr ibutions from DF, cor e -polarization (CP) and valence-virtual correlation (VC) effects. The diagrams contributing to these are shown in Fig.13. The other dominant contribution to the core-polarization is from th e term DS, and the corresponding diagram are shown in Fig.10(b) and its exchange. The contribution from the valence-virtual correlation is estimated by subtracting the co ntributions of diagrams (a), (b) and (c) in Fig .13 from DS. The percentage con tributions of DF, CP and VC are shown in Fig. 14. For both the atoms, as to be expected, the DF has the largest contribution. In terms of percentage, it constitutes ≈ 66.9%(65.2%) and 69.7%(70.6%) of the DScontribution fo r theP(P) state of Al and In, respectively. Between CP and VC, except forPstate of Al, contribution from VC effect is larger than CP and it is more signif- FIG. 15. Contributions from the Breit interaction, vacuum polarization and the self-energy corrections forPandPstates of Al and I n. icant in the case of In. In quantitative terms, it constitutes ≈ 22.8%(16.9%) and 2 7.1%(43.4%) of the DSfor the P(P) state of Al and In, respectively. The CP contributions are ≈ 10.3%(17.9%) and 3.2%(13.9%) of the DS forP(P) state of Al and In. It is, however, to be emphasized that the CP contribution in In is smaller than Al. Th is indicates a better screening of nuclea r potential in In. The VC contribution, on the contrary, is larger than Al. The contributions from the Breit interaction, vacuum polarization and the self -energy corrections ar e listed in the Table VI. And, for easy comparison, the c ontributions in p e rcentage are plotted in th e Fig.15. As discernible from the ﬁgure, for the both states, the Breit contribution in Al is larger than In. This is consistent with the trend reported in our previous work [31] where we found that, among all the group-13 ions, Alhas the highe st contribution. The largest contribution is ≈ 1.3% f or thePstate. For the VP and SE contributions, in contrast to the trend of Breit contribution, these are larger in In than Al. The largest contribution from VP is ≈ 0.3% for thePstate, whereas, SE has the largest contribution of ≈ 0.5%, for the case ofPstate of In. The largest combined contribution from Breit interaction and QED corrections is ≈ 1.3%, in the case ofPstate of Al. Considering the need of accur a te α from theory calculations, this is a signiﬁcant contribution and can not be ignored. Based on the various approximations used in the computations of α, we h ave identiﬁed four sources of uncertainties. The ﬁrst source of uncertainty is associated with the basis set truncation. From the convergence of α we observe th at the TABLE VI. Contributions to α (a.u.) from Breit interaction, vacuum polarization and the self-energy corrections. change in α, with orbitals up to h-symmetry, is ≤ 10(a.u.) when th e optimal basis set is a ugmented. And, as listed in the TableIV, the largest overall contribution from the i, j a nd k symmetry orbitals is in the case ofPof In and am ounts to ≈ 0.06%. Although the combined contribution from the orbitals with higher symmetries, beyond the k-symmetry, is expected to be smaller we take 0.1% as an upper bound from this source. The second source of uncertainty is the truncation of the dressed operator¯D to D+DT+TD+TDT. To estimate the uncertainty from this source, we use the ﬁndings from our previous work [40] where we showed that the terms with third-order in Tand higher together contribute less th a n 0.1%. We take this as the upper bound from this source. The third source of uncertainty is the tr uncation of CC operato rs to singles and dou bles. Among the higher excitations, triple excitations contribute the most, and the dominant contribution is subsumed in the perturbative triples. In our previous work [31] on the dipole polarizability of group13 ions, we had calculated the contributions from perturbative triples to b e ≈ 0.06 % and 0.28% for Al and In, respectively. Though the cumulative contribution from the missing correlation effects in p erturbative triples and higher excitations is expected to be smaller, we take 0.56% as the upper bound from this source of uncertainty. The last source of theoretical uncertainty is associated with the frequency-dependent Breit interaction which is not included in our calculations. To estimate an upper bound of this source we use the results in our previous work [54], where using GRASP2K we estimated an upper bound of 0.13% for Ra. As Al and In are ligh ter than Ra, the contribution is expected to be smaller, we take 0.13% as the unce rtainty from this source. T here could be other sources of theoretical uncertainties, such as the hig her order coupled perturbation of vacuum polarization a nd selfenergy terms, etc . These, h owever, have much smaller contributions and th e ir combined unc ertainty could be below 0.1%. On combining the upper bounds of all four sources of uncer- IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. IM-31, 83 (1982). [2] C. W. Chou, D. B. Hume, J. C. J. Koelemeij, D. J. tainties, we estimate a theoretical uncertainty of 1 % in the recommended values of α. We have developed a relativistic coupled-cluster theory based method to compute the properties of one-valence atoms and ions with an external perturbation. We employ this method to calculate the electric dipole polarizability of ground state and SO-splitted excited state of Al and I n. In addition, to test the quality of the wavefunctions, we also ca lculated the excitation energy o f few low lying states. To improve the accuracy of α further, contributions from the Bre it interaction and QED corrections are included. And, to ensure the convergence of α with basis size, large ba ses up to k-symmetry are used. For thePstate, our recommended value lies within th e range of the previous the oretical results for both the atoms. In particular, our results are closer to those reported in Refs. [22] and [21] for Al and In, respectively. For thePstate, however, our recommended value is lager than the previous values. It is to be mentioned that our LPRCC values are closer to the previous results. The re a son for the larger PRCC values could be attributed to better in clusion of correlation effects through the inclusion of nonlinear terms. From the a nalysis of the electron correlations, we ﬁnd that for both the atoms, VC contribution is larger than CP. Between Al and In, the contribution from CP decreases, however, VC effects are found to in crease. In terms of orbital con tributions, for Al, the ﬁrst two dominant contributions to α come from the 3p − 3d and 3p − 4s dipolar mixings. For In, however, they ar e from the 5p − 5d and 5p − 6s mixings. For the contribution from the Breit interaction, the largest contribution is ≈ 1.3% of the DC value, o bserved in the case ofPstate of Al. An d, the largest contributions from the Uehling potential and the self-energy co rrections are, ≈ 0.3 % and 0.5%, respectively, in the case ofPandPstates of In. We thank Siddhartha Chattopadhy ay fo r useful suggestion on the manuscript. We would also like to thank Chandan, Suraj and Palki for useful discussions. One of the authors, BKM, acknowledges the funding support from th e SERB (ECR/2016/0 01454). The re sults presented in the pape r are based on the computations using the High Performance Computing cluster, Padum, at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi. parison of two high-accuracy Aloptical clocks,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 070802 (2010). [3] M. S. Safronova, M. G. Kozlov, and Charles W. Clark, “Pre- cision calculation of blackbody radiation shifts for optical frequency metrology,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 143006 (2011). [4] Z. Zuhrianda, M. S. Safronova, and M. G. Kozlov, “Anomalously small blackbody radiation shift in the Tlfrequency standard,”Phys. Rev. A 85, 022513 (2012). [5] J.-S. Chen, S. M. Brewer, C. W. Chou, D. J. Wineland, D. R. Leibrandt, and D. B. Hume, “Sympathetic ground state cooling and time-dilation shifts in anAloptical clock,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 053002 (2017). [6] S. M. Brewer, J.-S. Chen, A. M. Hankin, E. R. Clements, C. W. Chou, D. J. Wineland, D. B. Hume, and D. R. Leibrandt, “Alquantum-logic clock with a systematic uncertainty below 10,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 033201 ( 2019). [7] S. M. Brewer, J.-S. Chen, K. Beloy, A. M. Hankin, E. R. Clements, C. W. Chou, W. F. McGrew, X. Zhang, R. J. Fasano, D. Nicolodi, H . Leopardi, T. M. Fortier, S. A. Diddams, A. D. Ludlow, D. J. Wineland, D. R. Leibrandt, and D. B. Hume, “Measurements ofAland Mgmagnetic constants for improved ion-clock accuracy,” Phys. Rev. A 100, 013409 (2019). AIP Conference Proceedings 477, 305–321 (1999), https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.59362. [9] I.B. Khriplovich, Parity Nonconservation in Atomic Phenomena (Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Philadelphia, 1991). [10] W. C. Grifﬁth, M. D. Swallows, T. H. Loftus, M. V. Romalis, B. R. Heckel, and E. N. Fortson, “Improved limit on the permanent electric dipole moment of Hg,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 101601 (2009). [11] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E. Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, “Observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in a dilute atomic vapor,”Science 269, 198–201 (1995). [12] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett, and R. G. Hulet, “Evidence of Bose-Einstein condensation in an atomic gas with attractive interactions,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687–1690 (1995). [13] K. B. Davis, M. O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van “Bose-Einstein condensation in a gas of sodium atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969–3973 (1995). [14] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, Anne harmonic generation by low-frequency laser ﬁelds,” Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117–2132 (1994). [15] Maciej Lewenstein, Pascal Sali`eres, and Anne L’Huillier, “Phase of the atomic polarization in high-order harmonic generation,”Phys. Rev. A 52, 4747–4754 (1995). [16] C. I. Blaga, F. Catoire, P. Colosimo, G. G. Paulus, H. G. Muller, P. Agostini, and L. F. Di Mauro, “Strong-ﬁeld photoionization revisited,”Nature Phys. 5, 335 (2009). [17] Yu Hang Lai, Cosmin I. Blaga, Junliang Xu, Harald Fuest, Louis F. DiMauro, “Polarizability effect in strong-ﬁeld ionization: Quenching of the low-energy structure in C,” Phys. Rev. A 98, 063427 (2018). [18] S. G. Karshenboim and E Peik, Astrophysics, Clocks and Fundamental Constants, Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer, New York, 2010). “Comment on “limits on the time variation of the electromagnetic ﬁne-structure constant i n the low energy limit from absorption lines in the spectra of distant quasars”,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 239001 (2007). [20] Timo Fleig, “Spin-orbit-resolved static polarizabilities ﬁguration interaction and coupled cluster calculations,” Phys. Rev. A 72, 052506 (2005). [21] Anastasia Borschevsky, Tamar Zelovich, Ephraim Eliav, and Uzi Kaldor, “Precision of calculated static polarizabilities: Ga, In and Tl atoms,”Chemical Physics 395, 104 – 107 (2012), recent Advances and Applications of Relativistic Quantum Chemistry. [22] A. A. Buchachenko, “State-interacting spin-orbit conﬁguration interaction method f or J- resolved anisotropic static dipole polarizabilities: Application to Al, Ga, In, and Tl atoms,” Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry A 84, 2325–2333 (2010). [23] Concetta Lupinetti and Aj it J. Thakkar, “Polarizabilities and hyperpolarizabilities for the atoms Al, The Journal of Chemical Physics 122, 044301 ( 2005), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1834512. [24] P. Fuentealba, “The static dipole polarizability of aluminium atom: discrepancy between theory and experiment,” Chemical Physics Letters 397, 459 – 461 (2004). [25] X. Chu and A. Dalgarno, “Linear response time-dependent density functional theory for van der waals coefﬁcients,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 121, 4083–4088 (2004), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1779576. [26] Paolo Milani, I. Moullet, and Walt A. de Heer, “Experimental and theoretical electric dipole polarizabilities of Al and A l,” Phys. Rev. A 42, 5150–5154 (1990). [27] G. S. Sarkisov, I. L. Beigman, V. P. Shevelko, and K. W. Struve, “Interferometric measurements of dynamic polarizabilities for metal atoms using electricall y exploding wires in vacuum,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 042501 (2006). [28] T. P. Guella, Thomas M. Miller, B. Bederson, J. A. D. Stockdale, and B. Jaduszliwer, “Polarizability of 5s5p(p) atomic indium,”Phys. Rev. A 29, 2977–2980 (1984). [29] Lei Ma, John Indergaard, B ai qian Zhang, Ilia Larkin, Ramiro Moro, and Walt A. de Heer, “Measured atomic ground-state polarizabilities of 35 metallic elements,” Phys. Rev. A 91, 010501 (2015). pac: A parallel relativistic coupled-cluster program for closed-shell and one-valence atoms and ions in fortran,” Computer Physics Communications 213, 136 – 154 (2017). [31] Ravi Kumar, S. Chattopadhyay, B. K. Mani, and D. Angom, “Electric dipole polarizability of group-13 ions using perturbed r elat ivistic coupled-cluster theory: Importance of nonlinear terms,” Phys. Rev. A 101, 012503 (2020). [32] Ravi Kumar, S . Chattopadhyay, D. Angom, and B. K. Mani, “Fock-space relativistic coupled-cluster calculation of a hyperﬁne-inducedS→Pclock transition in al,” Phys. Rev. A 103, 022801 (2021). “Relativistic many-body calculations of energy levels, hyperﬁne constants, electric-dipole matrix elements, and static polarizabilities for alkali-metal atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 60, 4476–4487 (1999). [34] A. Derevianko, W. R . Johnson, M. S. Safronova, and J. F. Babb, “High-precision calculations of dispersion coefﬁcients, static dipole polarizabilities, and atom-wall interaction constants for alkali-metal atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3589–3592 (1999). [35] J Mitroy, M S Safronova, and Charles W Clark, “Theory and applications of atomic and ionic polarizabilities,” Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 43, 202001 (2010). [36] Peter Schwerdtfeger and Jeffrey K. Nagle, “2018 table of static dipole polarizabilities of the neutral elements in the periodic t able,”Molecular Physics 117, 1200–1225 (2019), https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2018.1535143. [37] A. K. Mohanty, F. A . Parpia, and E. C lementi, “Kinetically balanced geometric gaussian basis set calculations for relativistic many-electron atoms,” in Modern Techniques in Computational Chemistry: MOTECC-91, edited by E. Clementi (ES COM, 1991). [38] Richard E. Stanton and Stephen Havriliak, “Kinetic balance: A partial solution to the problem of variational safety in dirac calculations,” J. Chem. Phys. 81, 1910–1918 (1984). tivistic coupled-cluster calculations ofNe,Ar,Kr, andXe: Correlation energies and dipole polarizabilities,” Phys. Rev. A 80, 062505 (2009). [40] B. K. Mani and D. Angom, “Atomic properties calculated by relativistic coupled-cluster theory without truncation: Hyperﬁne constants of Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba,” Phys. Rev. A 81, 042514 (2010). [41] S. Chattopadhyay, B. K. Mani, and D. Angom, “Perturbed coupled-cluster t heory to calculate dipole polarizabilities of closed-shell systems: Application to Ar, Kr, Xe, and Rn,” Phys. Rev. A 86, 062508 (2012). Chem. Phys. Lett. 73, 393 – 398 (1980). gom, “Chapter 10 A C omputer-Algebraic Approach to the Derivat ion of Feynman-Goldstone Perturbation Expansions for Open-Shell Atoms and Molecules,” Advances in Quantum Chemistry 53, 177–215 (2008). [44] I. Lindgren and J. Morrison, Atomic Many-Body Theory (Springer, Berlin, 2nd Edition, 1986). [45] P. J¨onsson, G. Gaigalas, J. Biero´n, C. Froese Fischer, and I. P. Grant, “New version: Grasp2k relativistic at omic structure package,” Comp. Phys. Comm. 184, 2197 – 2203 (2013). [46] I P Grant and B J McKenzie, “The transverse electronelectron interaction in atomic st ructure calculations,” J. Phys. B 13, 2671 (1980). [47] E. A. Uehling, “Polarization effects in the positron theory,” Phys. Rev. 48, 55–63 (1935) . [48] L. Wayne Fullerton and G. A. Rinker, “Accurate and efﬁcient methods for the evaluation of vacuum-polarization potentials of order zα and zα,”Phys. Rev. A 13, 1283–1287 (1976). [49] V. M. Shabaev, I. I. Tupitsyn, and V. A. Yerokhin, “Model operator approach to the lamb shift calculations in relativistic many-electron atoms,”Phys. Rev. A 88, 012513 (2013). [50] V.M. Shabaev, I .I. Tupitsyn, and V.A. Yerokhin, “Qedmod: Fortran program for calculating the model lamb-shift operator,” Computer Physics Communications 189, 175–181 (2015). Springer Handbook of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, edited by Gordon Drake (Springer, New York, 2006) pp. 325– 357. https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/ASD/levels_form.html (2013). [53] M. S. Safronova, U. I. Safronova, and S. G. Porsev, “Polarizabilities, Stark shifts, and lifetimes of the In atom,” Phys. Rev. A 87, 032513 (2013). [54] S. Chattopadhyay, B. K. Mani, and D. Angom, “Electric dipole polarizability of alkaline-earth-metal atoms from perturbed relativistic coupled-cluster theory with triples,” Phys. Rev. A 89, 022506 (2014).