Avishek Choudhury  *School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Pointe, Hoboken,  07030, New Jersey, USA.   Abstract.   Background: Pleural Mesothelioma (PM) is an unusual, belligerent tumor that rapidly develops  into cancer in the pleura of the lungs. Pleural Mesothelioma is a common type of Mesothelioma  that  accounts  for  about  75%  of  all  Mesothelioma  diagnosed  yearly  in  the  U.S.  Diagnosis  of  Mesothelioma takes several months and is expensive. Given the risk and constraints associated  with PM diagnosis, early identification of this ailment is essential for patient health.   Objective: In this study, we use artificial intelligence algorithms recommending the best fit model  for early diagnosis and prognosis of MPM.   Methods:  We  retrospectively  retrieved  patient’s  clinical  data  collected  by  Dicle  University,  Turkey and applied multilayered perceptron (MLP),  voted perceptron  (VP),  Clojure classifier  (CC),  kernel  logistic  regression  (KLR),  stochastic  gradient  decent  SGD),  adaptive  boosting  (AdaBoost), Hoeffding tree (VFDT), and primal estimated sub-gradient solver for support vector  machine  (s-Pegasos).  We  evaluated  the  models,  compared  and  tested  using  paired  T-test  (corrected)  at  0.05  significance  based  on  their  respective  classification  accuracy,  f-measure,  precision, recall, root mean squared error, receivers’ characteristic curve (ROC), and precisionrecall curve (PRC).   Results: In phase-1, SGD, AdaBoost. M1, KLR, MLP, VFDT generate optimal results with the  highest possible performance measures. In phase 2, AdaBoost, with a classification accuracy of  71.29%,  outperformed  all  other  algorithms.  C-reactive  protein,  platelet  count,  duration  of  symptoms, gender, and pleural protein were found to be the most relevant predictors that can  prognosticate Mesothelioma.   Conclusion: This study confirms that data obtained from Biopsy and imagining tests are strong  predictors  of  Mesothelioma  but  are  associated  with  a  high  cost;  however,  they  can  identify  Mesothelioma with optimal accuracy.  Keywords:  Mesothelioma,  Predictive  modeling,  Decision  support  system,  Machine  learning,  Artificial intelligence, Lung cancer,   Pleural Mesothelioma (PM) is an unreceptive tumor of mesothelial cells associated with prior  exposure to asbestos. The 2015 World Health Organization classification subdivides mesothelioma  tumors into three histological categories: (a) epithelioid, (b) biphasic, and (c) sarcomatoid MM [1].  Despite the availability of chemotherapy [2, 3] and a diverse range of clinical inspections, accurate  prognostication of PM has been a concern among clinicians and patients. PM is an exceptionally  unique ailment. Its staging system [4] results in a confusing preliminary identification process [5,  6], and the different biology [7] deters accurate prognostication. Within a general population, PM  affects about 2 people per million per annum [8]. Additionally, due to more exposure to asbestos  [9], industrialized zones are severely affected by PM [9-11]. It has been estimated that death due  to Mesothelioma in  Western  Europe  will almost double  every  year. About  9000 deaths  were  estimated around 2018, and a projection of a quarter of a million deaths is calculated by 2029.  The severity of Mesothelioma can be categorized into stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, and stage 4  (cancer).  Stage1  and  stage  2  symptoms  of  PM,  such  as  dry  coughing,  dyspnea,  respiratory  complications, chest or abdominal pain, fever, pleural effusion, fatigue, and muscle weakness are  very weak predictors of Mesothelioma [12]. Since Mesothelioma is rare, patients are less likely to  be suspected of the disease. Moreover, its initial symptoms during stage 1 and 2 are similar to  common  diseases  such  as  pneumonia  and  irritable  bowel  syndrome  [13],  PM  can  also  be  misdiagnosed as adenocarcinoma which is a non-terminal lung cancer [13]. If Mesothelioma is not  diagnosed and meets no medical aid at its early stage, it rapidly burgeons into a phase 3 or stage 4  cancer. Unfortunately, the survival rate after being diagnosed with last-stage Mesothelioma is  typically about a year. To treat Mesothelioma effectively, an early diagnosis is recommended.  Diagnosing  Mesothelioma  is  challenging,  and  the  expenses  associated  with identifying  this  disease can ascend rapidly. In fact, since the primary way to diagnose Mesothelioma incorporates  ruling  out  other  plausible  diseases,  more  frequently  than  not,  many  examinations  may  be  administered that isn’t exclusive to Mesothelioma itself but are for erstwhile disorders instead [14].  Furthermore, it is often suggested getting a second opinion [14], recapping many of the diagnostic  tests over and over. For all these causes, diagnostic expenses for Mesothelioma starts piling up  even before the necessary treatment commences. Mesothelioma diagnosis typically implicates  taking imaging scans of tumors, examining a biopsy of cancer tissue, and blood tests [13].  Existing Mesothelioma diagnosis employs multiple imaging tests, such as X-rays, CT scans,  MRI, and PET scan [13], all of which are expensive. The specialized imaging equipment is costly  both for an upfront purchase and for maintenance. Secondly, this equipment requires well-trained  technicians to ensure apt operation of the device. A patient can presume to spend about $800 —  $1,600 [14] for a single CT, MRI, or PET scan, respectively. Moreover, multiple scans may be  required during diagnosis [14], which can quickly burgeon the overall costs.  Among all the existing means of diagnosis, Biopsy has been recognized as the most accurate  invasive method that confirms Mesothelioma [13]. It is a procedure that requires the removal of  fluid or tissue samples from the tumor or cancer site and their analysis under a microscope. There  are many diverse approaches to obtaining a biopsy, and which one to be used depends on the  suspected tumors’ location. Some biopsies embrace making an incision and inserting implements  to obtain a sample of the tumor cell, while others only require a needle. Given the wide range of  biopsy procedures, its expenses can range from $500 to $700 for a needle biopsy [14], $3,600 to  $5000 for pleuroscopy (lungs) or laparoscopy (abdomen) [14], $7,800 to $7,900 for thoracotomy  (lungs) or laparotomy (abdomen) [14]. Like other diagnostic procedures, biopsies may also require  to  be  performed  multiple  times  [14],  increasing  the  overall  diagnosis  expenses.  Doctors  also  explore a variety of blood tests such as MESOMARK, SOMAmer, and Human MPF to look for  biomarkers that suggest Mesothelioma [13]. However, currently, no blood tests are precise enough  to confirm a diagnosis on their own [13].  Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma has the potential to grow into cancer and sabotage patient  health.  Like  any  other  fatal  disease,  PM  demands  early  diagnosis  and  effective  treatment.  However, effective diagnosis methods, such as thoracotomy and pleuroscopy, are costly and might  not be affordable for patients worldwide [15, 16]. Additionally, about two-thirds of the world do  not have adequate access to the required technologies, expensive imaging devices, and expert  technicians [17].  There exists some work of literature that has used artificial intelligence algorithms such as but  are not limited to a decision tree, random forest, support vector machine, and artificial neural  network to identify PM [18] but with some limitations. Decision tree models, including Random  Forest, are prone  to overfitting [19]  or fails to  generate 100%  accuracy or  might also fail  to  converge a large data set [20].  In our study, we propose a model that overcome the flaws as mentioned above and can diagnose  PM with and without requiring data from expensive Biopsy and imaging tests.  In this study, we used data extracted from clinical reports generated by Dicle University, Turkey.  The data set consists of 324 patient data with 35 variables. Out of 324 observations, 41% were  females. The patients involved in this study were in nine different cities. We performed k-fold  cross-validation to minimize any bias and variance in the data set. Cross-validation is a resampling  technique used to gauge machine learning models on a limited data set. In this method, we divided  the data set into a K-folds and used each fold as a testing set (Figure 1).  In this study, we considered the value of k to be 10 becoming 10-fold cross-validation. The  selection of k is usually 5 or 10 [21], and this value of k prohibits extreme high bias and variance  [22].  All  the  analysis  was  performed  using  R-studio,  an  open-source  machine  learning  and  statistical tool, and Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA), a free software suite  of machine learning licensed under the GNU General Public License, programmed in JAVA, and  developed at the University of Waikato, New Zealand.  Table 1 lists all the attributes contained in our data set, and it also determines the mean, deviation,  and logistic correlation of all predictors with the target variable (“class of diagnosis”). The data set  used in this study had an imbalanced class variable, as shown in Figure 2. Consecutively, Figure 3  exhibits  the  correlation  matrix  of  the  dataset,  and  Figure  4  shows  the  numeric  variables,  respectively.  Table 1. Data Statistics  Mesothelioma data set can be broadly divided into pre-diagnosis data and post-diagnosis data.  Pre-diagnosis  data  refers  to  the  all  the  records  obtained  before  Mesothelioma  was  clinically  confirmed such as patient age, gender, the city they belonged to, smoking habit, exposure to  asbestos,  duration  of  exposure  to  asbestos,  early-stage  symptoms  including  the  feeling  of  weakness,  heartache,  and  dyspnea,  and  duration  of  symptoms.  Pre-diagnosis  data  also  encompasses blood test results such as white blood cell count, hemoglobin level, platelets count,  and others. Post-diagnosis are those data that refers to the records retrieved after Mesothelioma  was confirmed. Type of Mesothelioma detected (a type of MM), side effects of chemotherapy  (keep side), and survival of the patient after treatment (dead or not) are all post-diagnosis data.  This study eliminates the “dead or not” predictor from all analyses.  Fig. 2. Unbalanced class variable. The data used was significantly unbalanced with an Odd ratio  of 0.5062 and a p-value of 0.0065 at a 95% confidence interval.  Fig. 4. Normalized representation of the numeric variables.  The predictor “diagnosis method” refers to data obtained from invasive Biopsy and imaging test  results. Invasive Biopsy and imaging tests can accurately identify Mesothelioma but are expensive  procedures and may require repeated examinations, as stated earlier. To advocate the applicability  of AI predictive analytics on both pre and post-diagnostic data, we perform a comparative analysis  of classification models into two phases. Phase-1 models use all the predictor variables except  “dead or not” as input to produce high classification accuracy. The same set of models in Phase-2  only takes relevant predictors from pre-diagnosis data as its input.  Phase-1 and phase-2 are denoted as high accuracy and low-cost phases respectively because  phase-1 execution demands data from expensive, invasive Biopsy and imaging test results, which  are robust predictors of MM (logistic correlation = 1) and thus the model is expected to yield high  accuracy.  Whereas,  phase-2  considers  only  predictors  with  lower  logistic  correlation  (prediagnosis data) and eliminates the use of invasive Biopsy and imaging test results. Execution of  phase-2  also  incorporates  a  feature  selection  method  to  enhance  its  accuracy  and  reduce  computational time.  Healthcare data sets are typically designated with several predictors for effective model structure  [23]. Commonly majority of these predictors are extraneous to the classification, and perceptibly  their significance is unknown in advance [23]. Many difficulties arise while dealing with large  feature sets. One is affably technical —large data sets impedes computational speed, consumes  resources, and is merely bothersome. Another is even more vital — many artificial intelligent  algorithms  reveal  a  diminution of performance when  the  number  of  variables  is  considerably  higher than optimal. Therefore, the selection of the smallest feature set that can yield the best  possible classification outcome is recommended. This problem also coined as the minimal-optimal  problem [24] and has been studied extensively. Moreover, many algorithms have been established  to reduce the feature set to a manageable and optimal size.  Nevertheless,  the  problem  mentioned  above  follows  another  setback  —the  “all-relevant  problem” [23]. Determining only the significant attributes is beneficial for developing predictive  models.  However,  it  is  essential  to  consider  all  attributes  to  understand  the  fundamental  mechanisms of the subject of interest. For instance, in an outpatient clinic, listening to the patient’s  concern, preferences,  family support  is  as important  as listening  to  their  medical history  and  symptoms before making any clinical decision. However, to build a predictive model, only data  related to the disease is required. An extensive discussion defining the importance of finding  relevant attributes is reported by Nilsson et al. in 2007 [24].  In phase-2 of our study, we used the Boruta algorithm and identified all relevant predictors.  Boruta algorithm is a wrapper built around the random forest algorithm [25]. Boruta uses Z-score  to measure the importance of a variable. Since we cannot use Z-score staunchly to determine  variable relevance, an external reference is used to confirm the essence of all attributes. Boruta  creates  a  ‘shadow  variable’  by  shuffling  values  of  the  original  attribute  then  performs  a  classification using the shadow and original variables to determine the importance of all predictors.  The  following  algorithms  were  implemented,  compared,  and  tested  using  paired  T-test  (corrected) at 0.05 significance.  Gradient descent  is a method to determine the  local minima. Stochastic gradient descent is  gradient descent performed using multiple updates at a time on a small batch (mini batch) of the  data set selected at random (stochastically). Instead of calculating the gradient of the cost (error)  based on the whole data set, SGD breaks the data set into mini-batches and compute the gradient  on each batch separately, followed by a neural net update based on the partial gradient. In other  words, it is an optimization algorithm that iteratively determines the values of learnable parameters  of a function (f) to minimize the cost function (error rate). The cost function for our study is a root  mean squared error, which can be determined using the following equation (Eq. (1)).  Mathematically, SGD is a simplification of gradient descent. Instead of calculating the gradient  of E (f ) (empirical risk using gradient descent), each iteration estimates this gradient by a single  randomly picked example (Eq. (2)):  Where z is a random pair of input x and scalar output y; w is weight; γ is learning rate; Q (z, w)  is the loss.  It is  also  known as  AdaBoost. M1  is a  meta-estimator applied concurrently with  other weak  algorithms  to  enhance performance.  AdaBoost can  fine-tune  the weak  algorithms  in favor  of  misclassified instances by previous classifiers. AdaBoost-M1 can be mathematically defined as  given below (Eq. (3)).  The weak learner accepts input x to yield a value indicating the class of the object. Each weak  learner produces an output hypothesis, h(x ). At each iteration t, a weak learner is generated and  assigned a coefficient t such that the sum of training error E (Eq. (4)) of the resulting t-stage boost  classifier is minimized.  Where F (x) is the boosted classifier from the previous stage of training. E(F) is an error function,  and f (x) = α h(x) is the weak learner.  This algorithm uses the kernel to allow classification of linearly non-separable. The kernel is a  conversion function that satisfies mercer’s necessary settings, stating that a kernel function must  be denoted as an inner product and be positive semi-definite.  It is a type of Artificial Neural Network (ANN). It typically consists of input, hidden, and an output  layer. The input layer contains set of neurons {x |x , x , ..., x } signifying the input variables. Every  neuron in the hidden layer converts the input with a weighted linear summation (w + w + ···  + w ), Followed by an activation function. The output layer collects the values from the hidden  layer and yields the result.  Figure 5 shows a standard neuron model with two parts. In the first part, the input data are  assembled for a sum. Each weight (w ) compeers a data dimension (x ), while bias (w ) adds to the  intercept of the function [26].  Fig. 5. Typical Neural Network.  In the second half, the initiation function uses the activation function such as ReLU, Sigmoid,  and Tanh [26] to obtain a nonlinear eigenvalue. MLP learns a function f (.): R → R by training a  data set, where m is the input dimension, and O is the dimension of the output. Figure 6 shows a 4  layered (L1 through L4) neural network, where L1 represents the input layer, L4 the output layer,  and L2, L3 the hidden layers.  Fig. 6. Feed-forward neural network.  This algorithm joins the Rosenblatt’s perception and Helmbold-Warmuth’s leave-out method to  calculate the weight vectors which during the learning process vote on a prediction. The output of  voted perceptron is given by Eq. (6):  Where x inputs, p = 0,1,2,...P; w are weights, y is the predicted class, and c is the survival time  (reliability of w ).  It  is  also  known  as  Very  Fast  Decision  Tree  (VFDT)  is  a  tree  algorithm  for  data  stream  classification. The Hoeffding tree is an incremental decision tree learner for a large data set, that  assumes that the data distribution is constant over time. It grows a decision tree based on the  theoretical guarantees of the Hoeffding bound. In other words, VFDT employs Hoeffding bound  to calculate the minimum number of observations  to reach a desirable level of confidence in  splitting the node.  It is a wrapper classifier developed in Clojure programming language. It mandates to have at least  a  learn-classifier  function  and  distribution-for-instance  function.  The  learn-classifier  function  takes an object and a string (nullable) and returns the learned model as a serializable data structure.  The distribution for-instance function takes an instance to be predicted and a model as an argument  and returns the prediction as an array.  It is also known as s-Pegasos. It performs SGD on a primal objective (Eq. (7), Eq. (8)) with  carefully chosen to step size.        Where              Supervised  machine  learning  models  are  primarily  evaluated  based  on  their  classification  accuracy. However, there are other crucial performance measures such as f-measure, root mean  squared error (RMSE), receiver operating characteristic (ROC), and precision-recall curve (PRC).    Where TP = True positive; TN = True negative; FP = False positive; FN = False-negative. The  AUC-ROC  curve  is  used  as  a  classification  performance  measurement  at  different  threshold  settings. It is a graphical representation sensitivity and false-positive, as shown in Eq. (10).    Regarding  information  retrieval  undertakings  with  binary  classification  (relevant  or  not  relevant), precision is the segment of retrieved instances that are relevant. In contrast, recall, also  known as sensitivity, is the fraction of retrieved cases to all relevant situations. In this context of  information retrieval, the PRC becomes very useful. PRC is a graphical representation of recall (xaxis) and precision (y-axis), where recall and precision are determined using the given formula  (Eq. (11), Eq. (12)), respectively.    F-measure, also known as F1-score, is the harmonic mean of precision and recall (Eq. (13)),  where f-measure reaches its best at 1 and worst at 0.  The root-mean-square error (RMSE) is a measure of the performance of a model. It does this by  computing the difference between predicted and the actual values as given below Eq. (14).          Where (x − y ) is the difference between the predicted and actual value, and N is the sample size.  As shown in Table 2, SGD, AdaBoost. M1, KLR, MLP, VFDT generates perfect results with 100%  accuracy, precision, recall, and f-measure. These algorithms also return the highest possible ROC,  PRC, and zero RMSE. s-Pegasos also delivers close to the optimal result. In this phase, the high  accuracy of 100% indicates that results obtained from Biopsy and imaging tests are very strong  predictors of MM. This result validates the significance of biopsy and imaging results (“diagnosis  method”) from a data science viewpoint.  Phase 2 demonstrates the relevance of pre-diagnosis data. It also shows the behavior of all  predicting models post removal of “diagnosis method” and other post-diagnosis data.  Boruta algorithm confirmed five relevant attributes that are enough to predict the presence of  Mesothelioma without any loss in the model’s performance. In other words, the selected attributes  alone can prognosticate MM with the same accuracy as all other pre-diagnosis predictors when  taken together as input. The relevant predictor identified were c-reactive protein, platelet count,  duration of symptoms, gender, and pleural protein.     This method neither downgrades the remaining predictors nor does it recommend revising the  regular  clinical  procedures.  Figure  7  below  shows  the  attributes  recognized  by  the  Boruta  algorithm. Boruta plot generates a color-coded box plot for each attribute where green represents  relevant predictors and red otherwise. The x-axis represents each of the candidate explanatory  variables. The green box plots refer to the relevant attributes, whereas the red ones are identified  as unimportant (from a data science viewpoint). Table 3 shows the performance measures of all  AI algorithms employed in this study.  AdaBoost outperformed all other models with the highest classification accuracy of 71.29%.  Excluding  the  “diagnosis method”  from  the prediction model resulted  in decreased  accuracy.  However, this phrase has an advantage. Despite lower accuracy, phase-2 helps to reduce diagnostic  expenses.  Table 3. Comparing AI performance (phase 2).  Our study presents a way to minimize incidentaloma. An incidentaloma (overdiagnosis) is an  incidental finding that is diagnosed in an asymptomatic or symptomatic patient for an unrelated  reason [27]. In other words, performing unnecessary testing until the actual diagnosis is performed.  Identification of the Mesothelioma typically involves overdiagnosis, especially if the identified  lesion is benign or an indolent tumor not likely to produce symptoms before the patient dies of  another cause. Overdiagnosis leads to excessive testing that adds up healthcare expenses, anxiety  in patients, and unnecessarily exposes the patient to potentially harmful radiations and invasive  surgeries. Additionally, our study achieves some goals of the American College of Radiology  (ACR) Incidental Findings Committee. The proposed method in this study fulfills the following:  informed decisions-based evidence rather than incidental findings.  Diagnosis  of  Mesothelioma  can  be  difficult,  especially  given  that  the  disease  is  relatively  uncommon. Moreover, Pleural fluid examination is not sensitive nor specific. CT-guided Biopsy,  which established diagnosis in this case, is limited by small sample size. Give these challenges; an  accurate diagnosis of PM is crucial at both the individual and public health levels. It has necessary  medico-legal significance due to diagnosis-related compensation [28]. However, prognosticating  PM is challenging due to its composite epithelial pattern and low likelihood of occurrence [28].  To advocate the prognosis of PM with high accuracy and low diagnostic cost, the current study  designed and implemented a prediction model consisting of two phases. (phase 1 and 2).  To  our  knowledge,  no  previous  studies  have  implemented  our  AI  models  and  focused  on  reducing diagnosis expenses by eliminating biopsy and imaging test results from the data set.  Phase-2 of our study proposes AdaBoost. M1 algorithm that can identify high-risk patients at lower  cost by taking only blood test results and patient’s demographic data. The outcome from phase-2  can provide the doctors with a list of high-risk patients. Doctors and other healthcare providers can  then prescribe biopsy tests only to the identified patients for reconfirming PM using a phase-1  model with optimal accuracy. This approach will reduce unnecessary biopsy tests and thus reduce  overall expenses by up to $7900 [14].  The  recommended  model  (AdaBoost)  in  phase-2  requires  c-reactive  protein,  platelet  count,  duration of symptoms, gender, and pleural protein as its input. The expenses to collect the required  input data can range from. $100 to $200 [29] for Protein Total Pleural Fluid (pleural protein), $40  to $70 [30] for c-reactive protein test, and $6 to $167 [31] for complete blood count (platelet count)  depending upon the location. These factors can also advocate early prognosis of MM; Moreover,  studies have shown that higher (>1 mg/dL) c-reactive protein influences mesothelioma [32] [33],  another study at the University of Maryland determined the clinical significance of preoperative  thrombocytosis (high count of platelets), in patients with MPM [34].  Our  study identifies that the diagnosis method (Biopsy  and imaging test results), c-reactive  protein, platelet count, duration of symptoms, gender, and pleural protein plays a significant role  in  diagnosing  PM.  However,  effective  diagnosis  methods  such  as  pleuroscopy  (lungs)  or  laparoscopy (abdomen), thoracotomy (lungs) or laparotomy (abdomen), and imaging tests (CT  scan and MRI) are expensive. This study proposes two approaches to predict PM, each having its  advantages and limitations. The first approach (phase 1) uses all predictors from mesothelioma  data and  produces  100% classification accuracy. The  second approach (phase 2)  ensures cost  reduction. Our study recommends AdaBoost algorithms for PM prognosis and suggests using the  phase-2 approach to shortlist high-risk patients, followed by phase 1 to confirm PM.  1.  P.  Courtiol,  C.  Maussion,  M.  Moarii  et  al.,  Deep  learning-based  classification  of  Mesothelioma improves prediction of patient outcome., Nature Medicine 25(1) (2019),  1519–1525. doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0583-3.  2.  N.J. Vogelzang, J.J. Rusthoven, J. Symanowski, C. Denham, E. Kaukel, P. Ruffie, U.  Gatzemeier, M. Boyer, S. Emri, C. Manegold, C. Niyikiza, and P. Paoletti, Phase III Study  of Pemetrexed in Combination With Cisplatin Versus Cisplatin Alone in Patients With  Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma, Journal of Clinical Oncology 21(14) (2003), 2636–2644.  doi:10.1200/jco.2003.11.136.   3.  G. Zalcman, J. Mazieres, J. Margery, L. Greillier, C. Audigier-Valette, D. Moro-Sibilot,  O. Molinier, R. Corre, I. Monnet, V. Gounant, F. Rivière, H. Janicot, R. Gervais, C. Locher,  B.  Milleron,  Q.  Tran,  M.-P.  Lebitasy,  F.  Morin,  C.  Creveuil,  J.-J.  Parienti  and  A.  Scherpereel, Bevacizumab for newly diagnosed pleural Mesothelioma in the Mesothelioma  Avastin Cisplatin Pemetrexed Study (MAPS): a randomised, controlled, open-label, phase  3 trial, The Lancet 387(10026) (2016), 1405–1414. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)01238-6.   4.  H. Pass, D. Giroux, and C. Kennedy, The IASLC mesothelioma staging project: improving  staging of a rare disease through 29. international participation, J Thorac Oncol 11 (2016),  2082–2088.  5.  R. Gill, D. Naidich and A. Mitchell, North American multicenter volumetric CT study for  clinical staging of malignant pleural 30. mesothelioma: feasibility and logistics of setting  up a quantitative imaging study, J Thorac Oncol 11 (2016), 1335–1344.  6.  T. Frauenfelder, M. Tutic, W. Weder, R.P. Gotti, R.A. Stahel, B. Seifert, and I. Opitz,  Volumetry: an alternative to assess therapy response for malignant pleural Mesothelioma?  European Respiratory Journal 38(1) (2011), 162–168. doi:10.1183/09031936.00146110.   7.  R. Bueno, E. Stawiski, and L. Goldstein, Comprehensive genomic analysis of malignant  pleural Mesothelioma identifies recurrent mutations, gene fusions, and splicing alterations,  Nat Genet 48 (2016), 407–416.  8.  J.C. McDonald  and  A.D. McDonald,  The  epidemiology of  Mesothelioma in  historical  context,  European  Respiratory  Journal  9(9)  (1996),  1932–1942.  doi:10.1183/09031936.96.09091932.  9.  C.W.  Noonan,  Environmental  asbestos  exposure  and  risk  of  Mesothelioma,  Annals  of  translational medicine 5(11) (2017), 234. doi:10.21037/atm.2017.03.74.  10. S.J. Henley, T.C. Larson, M. Wu, V.C.S. Antao, M. Lewis et al., Mesothelioma incidence  in 50 states and the District of Columbia, United States, 2003–2008, International Journal  of  occupational  and  environmental  health  19(1)  (2013),  1–10.  doi:10.1179/2049396712Y.0000000016.  11. J. Leigh, C.F. Corvalán, A. Grimwood, G. Berry, D.A. Ferguson, and R. Thompson, The  incidence  of  malignant  Mesothelioma  in  Australia  1982–1988,  American  Journal  of  Industrial Medicine 20(5) (1991), 643–655. doi:10.1002/ajim.4700200507.   12. M.  News,  What  Mesothelioma  Does  to  the  Body,  2018.  http://www.mesotheliomanews.com/medical/mesotheliomadiagnosis/pleuralmesothelioma/.  13. K.  Selby,  Mesothelioma  Diagnosis,  2018.  https://www.asbestos.com/mesothelioma/diagnosis/.  14. L.  Molinari,  Mesothelioma  Treatment  Costs,  2018.  https://www.mesothelioma.com/treatment/mesothelioma-treatmentcosts/.  15. R.B.  Friedin,  Am  I  going  to  die  because  I  cannot  afford  the  test?,  2012.  https://www.kevinmd.com/blog/2012/05/dieafford-test.html.  16. T.P.  Pope,  When  Patients  Can’t  Afford  Their  Care,  2010.  https://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/04/when-patients-cantafford-their-care/.  17. J.  Silvester,  Most  of  the  World  Doesn’t  Have  Access  to  X-Rays.,  2016.  https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2016/ 09/radiology-gap/501803/.  18. H.O. Ilhan and E. Celik, The mesothelioma disease diagnosis with artificial intelligence  methods,  in  IEEE  10th  International  Conference  on  Application  of  Information  and  Communication Technologies, 2016.  19. K.  Tin,  Random  decision  forests,  Proceedings  of  3rd  International  Conference  on  Document Analysis and Recognition (1995).  20. E. Lotfi and A. Keshavarz, Gene expression microarray classification using PCA–BEL,  Computers  in  Biology  and  Medicine  54  (2014),  180–187.  doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.09.008.  https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.  09.008.  21. M.  Kuhn  and  K.  Johnson,  Applied  Predictive  Modeling,  Springer,  New  York,  2018.  doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-6849-3.  https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-14614-6849-3.pdf.  22. G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to Statistical Learning:  with  Applications  in  R,  et  al.,  ed.,  Springer,  2017.  doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-7138-7.  https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-1-4614-7138-7.pdf.  23. M.B. Kursa and W.R.  Rudnicki,  Feature Selection  with theBorutaPackage, Journal  of  Statistical Software 36(11) (2010), 2–13. doi:10.18637/jss.v036.i11.   24. R.  Nilsson,  J.M. Peña,  J.  Björkegren,  and  J.  Tegner,  Consistent  Feature  Selection  for  Pattern Recognition in Polynomial’ Time, The Journal of Machine Learning Research 8  (2007), 612–612.  25. A. Liaw and M. Wiener, Classification and Regression by random, Forest. R News 2(3)  (2002), 18–22.  26. S.-J.  Lee,  T.  Chen,  L.  Yu,  and  C.-H.  Lai,  Image  Classification  Based  on  the  Boost  Convolutional Neural Network, IEEE Access 6 (2018), 12755–12768.  27. R. Chojniak, Incidentalomas: managing risks, Radiologia brasileira 48(4) (2015), 9–10.  doi:10.1590/01003984.2015.48.4e3.  28. V. Ascoli, Pathologic diagnosis of malignant Mesothelioma: Chronological prospect and  advent of recommendations and guidelines, Ann Ist Super Sanità 51(1) (2015), 52–59.  29. Practo,  Protein  Total  Pleural  Fluid,  2017.  https://www.practo.com/tests/protein-totalpleural-fluid/p.  30. M. Haiken, 3 New Medical Tests that Can Save Your Life - But You Have to Ask, 2011.  https://www.forbes.com/sites/ melaniehaiken/2011/06/17/3-lifesaving-new-medical-testsyou-have-to-ask-for/#2df47f75398a.  31. J. Pinder, How much does a blood test cost? It could be $6, or $167. (Clear Health Cost  Beta), 2012. https://clearhealthcosts.com/blog/2012/12/how-much-does-a-blood-test-costit-could-be-16-or-117/.  32. S. Takamori, G. Toyokawa, M. Shimokawa, F. Kinoshita, Y. Kozuma, T. Matsubara, N.  Haratake, T. Akamine, F. Hirai, T. Seto, T. Tagawa, M. Takenoyama, Y. Ichinose, and Y.  Maehara, The C-Reactive Protein/Albumin Ratio is a Novel Significant Prognostic Factor  in  Patients  with  Malignant  Pleural  Mesothelioma:  A  Retrospective  Multi-institutional  Study, Annals of Surgical Oncology 25(6) (2018), 1555–1563. doi:10.1245/s10434-0186385-x.   33. B. Ghanim, M.A. Hoda, M.-P. Winter, T. Klikovits, A. Alimohammadi, B. Hegedus, B.  Dome, M. Grusch, M. Arns, P. Schenk, W. Pohl, C. Zielinski, M. Filipits, W. Klepetko and  W.  Berger,  Pretreatment  Serum  C-Reactive  Protein  Levels  Predict  Benefit  From  Multimodality Treatment Including Radical Surgery in Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma,  Annals of Surgery 256(2) (2012),357–362. doi:10.1097/sla.0b013e3182602af4.   34. Y.C. Li, T. Khashab, J. Terhune, R.L. Eckert, N. Hanna, A. Burke, and H.R. Alexander,  Preoperative  Thrombocytosis  Predicts  Shortened  Survival  in  Patients  with  Malignant  Peritoneal  Mesothelioma  Undergoing  Operative  Cytoreduction  and  Hyperthermic  Intraperitoneal  Chemotherapy,  Annals  of  Surgical  Oncology 24(8)  (2017),  2259–2265.  doi:10.1245/s10434017-5834-2.  