Astrometric detection of exoplanets by stellar reﬂex motion will be made possible for giant planets by the recent Gaia mission and for Earth-like planets by proposed missions such as LUVOIR. At the theoretical limits, astrometry would allow for the detection of smaller planets than previously seen by current exoplanet search methods, but stellar activity may make these theoretical limits unreachable. Astrometric jitter of a Sun-like star due to magnetic activity in its photosphere induces apparent variability in the photocenter of order 0.5 mR . This jitter creates a fundamental astrophysical noise ﬂoor preventing detection of lower mass planets in a single spectral band. By injecting planet orbits into simulated solar data at ﬁve diﬀerent passbands, we investigate mitigation of this fundamental astrometric noise using correlations across passbands. For a true solar analog and a planet at 1 au semi-major axis, the 5-sigma detection limit set by stellar activity for an ideal telescope at the best single passband is 0.01 Earth masses. We found that pairs of passbands with highly correlated astrometric jitter due to stellar activity but with less motion in the redder band enable higher precision measurements of the common signal from the planet. Using this method improves detectable planet masses at 1 au by up to a factor of 8, corresponding to at best 0.004 Earth masses for a Sun-like star with a perfect telescope. Given these results, we recommend that future astrometry missions consider proceeding with two or more passbands to reduce noise due to stellar activity. <title>arXiv:2112.06383v1  [astro-ph.EP]  13 Dec 2021</title> interferometry to achieve high precision measurements (Goullioud et al. 2008). The mission was cancelled in 2010, but it charted out a path towards Earth-size planet detection using interferometry. With recent improvements in technology and upcoming missions, astrometric planet detection will become possible. The ongoing Gaia astrometry mission (Gaia Collaboration 2016), extrapolated to a 10 year duration, is expected to ﬁnd 70,000 new exoplanets (Perryman et al. 2014). These would all be high-mass (approximately Jupiter-mass or larger) planets with long-period orbits. LUVOIR is an upcoming mission expected to ﬁnd smaller Earth-like planets via astrometry (The LUVOIR Team 2019). For lower mass planets with smaller orbital periods, astrometric jitter due to magnetic activity in the host star creates a fundamental astrophysical noise ﬂoor for astrometric planet detection. 2 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. Magnetic activity in stars creates features in the photosphere whose surface brightness is brighter or darker than average. These features include the brighter faculae and the darker spots, the latter comprised of both penumbrae and umbrae (Solanki 2003). As the star rotates and these features move across the visible portion of the stellar photosphere, they cause displacements in the observed photocenter, creating an astrometric jitter in time. Such displacements were demonstrated for Sun-like stars with a simple model by Lanza et al. (2008). These displacements mimic astrometric planet signals, and they must be mitigated for optimal performance. To estimate the amplitude of the variations from stellar magnetic activity, Makarov et al. (2010) used maps of the bolometric surface intensity of the solar disk derived from the Mount Wilson Observatory magnetograms and intensity ratio images of the Sun to calculate the photocenter displacements. They found a maximum displacement of 0.56 milli solar radii (mR ). Later, Lagrange et al. (2011) extended solar data to stars 10 pc away to see how signiﬁcant this variability is compared to orbital reﬂex motion due to an exoplanet. They found that for stars with similar distributions of magnetic features as the Sun, the astrometric jitter from magnetic activity had an rms of 0.07 µas. These amplitudes are much smaller than those expected due to the orbit of an Earth-mass planet at a 1 au semi-major axis (averaging 0.3 µas along the equatorial plane), so they concluded that instrumental precision rather than magnetic activity is the limiting factor for planet detection in this case. More recently, Morris et al. (2018) compared the eﬀects of stellar magnetic activity with the precision of Gaia’s astrometry. By simulating Gaia observations on stars, accounting for shifts in the photocenter due to just dark starspots, they found that Gaia’s precision is likely suﬃcient to detect the astrometric eﬀects of magnetic activity in nearby active stars. In this paper, we investigate a multi-wavelength strategy for stellar magnetic activity noise mitigation, to aid in astrometric detection of exoplanets. We use solar simulations from Shapiro et al. (2021) in ﬁve diﬀerent passbands to leverage correlations in photocenter displacements across wavelengths. We neglect eﬀects related to instrumental precision to demonstrate reducing the astrophysical noise ﬂoor due to just magnetic activity in Sun-like stars. In Section 2, we summarize the methodology for turning the solar simulations into astrometric measurements and compare the chosen passbands. In Section 3, we inject planet orbits into these simulations and test if we can recover the planet signal as a detection. In Section 4, we investigate multi-wavelength noise mitigation and demonstrate its eﬀectiveness in a sample case. Lastly, in Section 5, we show how diﬀerent pairs of passbands reduce the lowest detectable planet mass with this approach to noise mitigation of stellar activity. We ﬁrst wish to model the astrometric noise due to stellar magnetic features in stars with levels of magnetic activity similar to the Sun. For these models, we use the results obtained by Shapiro et al. (2021), and we outline the most important steps in their analysis here for completeness. These astrometric time series utilize the SATIRE-S model of the sun (Krivova et al. 2011), which derives the distribution of the magnetic features of the solar disk from daily solar magnetograms and intensity images. The model takes the solar equator to be at a 7.25 angle with respect to the ecliptic. We project all motion of the photocenter along the X-axis, aligned with the solar equator, therefore treating the motion in 1D for simplicity. We choose this axis because it is the direction with the most day-to-day astrometric jitter; a full 2D analysis of the astrometric motion is outside the scope of this work. The photocenter is then calculated as a function of time as the intensity-weighted average of the X coordinates of each pixel: where α (t) is the fractional coverage of the ith pixel by the kth type of magnetic feature, as calculated from the magnetograms in Yeo et al. (2014). The coordinate system is deﬁned such that the origin is the photocenter of the quiet Sun, which requires that (t)X = 0. In Figure 1, we show sample solar disks from the SATIRE-S model, with the resulting photocenters marked, to demonstrate how the photocenter shifts due to magnetic features according to Equation (1). 4 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. for energy intensities I of the kth feature. For detectors that count photon intensities I instead, such as Gaia’s CCD detectors, we can convert to energy intensities by multiplying by the photon energies to get I (λ, µ , t) = (λ, µ , t), where λ is the central wavelength, with h as Planck’s constant and c as the speed of light. Here ∆Ω is “the solid angle of the region on the solar surface that corresponds to one pixel when the magnetograms are obtained at 1 au from the Sun” (Shapiro et al. 2021). I(λ, µ , t) is the intensity measured by the detector at wavelength λ and given µ , the cosine of the heliocentric angle at the ith pixel (i.e., the angle between the vector from that pixel to the observer and the vector normal to the solar surface at that pixel). φ(λ) is the transmission curve of the given passband. The time series from Shapiro et al. (2021) include simulations for ﬁve diﬀerent passbands. The ﬁrst three of these correspond to the Gaia G, B, and R passbands of the Gaia astrometry mission according to the Gaia DR2 revised passbands. The fourth is the near-infrared passband of the Small-JASMINE mission planned for 2024 (Utsunomiya et al. 2014), which is treated as a top hat transmission proﬁle between 1100 and 1700 nm. The ﬁfth simulation corresponds to the Total Spectral Irradiance (TSI), which is the spectrally integrated energy ﬂux (Kopp 2016). Passbands were chosen to illustrate the wavelength-dependence of the astrometric signal due to magnetic activity. The spectral transmission proﬁles for the Gaia passbands and the near-infrared Small-JASMINE passband are shown in Figure 2, along with the spectra used in the SATIRE-S model for the quiet Sun, the bright faculae, and the dark sunspot penumbrae and umbrae. These spectra are computed according to the work done by Unruh et al. (1999), and they are then used to produce the astrometric time series. The simulations of the astrometric signal in the ﬁve diﬀerent passbands are taken with daily cadence from February 2, 1999 to August 1, 2014, corresponding to a 15.5 year duration, spanning 1.4 solar activity cycles. The time series for the Gaia B passband is shown in the left panel of Figure 3. The astrometric jitter is of order 0.5 mR , which is approximately the same amplitude as the Earth’s gravitational eﬀect on the Sun’s center of mass. We wish to inject reﬂex motion due to orbiting planets into these simulations and check whether the planet signal can be detected. These detections are diﬃcult in the time domain but straightforward in the frequency domain. In the frequency domain, for a simulation duration much longer than the orbital period, the signal due to a circular orbit approaches a delta function at the orbit’s frequency. Therefore, in such cases the planet can simply be detected as a spike in the amplitude spectrum of the astrometry simulation. Planets with non-zero eccentricity would contribute spikes at higher-frequency harmonics to this spectrum, so for simplicity we conﬁne our investigation to circular orbits. To convert from the time series to the amplitude spectrum, we use the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Before applying this transformation, we ﬁrst multiply the time series by the Hanning window, which goes to zero at the edges to attenuate the signal. Because the DFT assumes perfect periodicity, this windowing reduces spectral leakage at high temporal frequencies. The Hanning window is shown in Figure 3 according to its deﬁnition, as a function of the kth data point for N total data points. We then take the DFT of the windowed time series, deﬁned as k = 0, . . . , N − 1, (5) where in this case a corresponds to the X displacement of the mth data point, for N total data points. An example of this process is shown in Figure 3, starting from the time series of the simulation in the Gaia B passband. 6 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. We next outline our scheme for estimating the lowest detectable planet mass at a given semi-major axis with a Sun-like host star. To do so, we inject reﬂex motion due to a planet in circular orbit into the simulations of stellar astrometry at the ﬁve passbands. For simplicity we assume circular planetary orbits and project all reﬂex motion along the X-axis—equivalent to an edge-on orbit—so that we are only considering astrometry in one dimension. This assumption allows us to work in a near-worst-case scenario where the orbital motion is projected along the same axis as most of the astrometric jitter due to stellar activity. A schematic diagram of the setup is provided in Figure 4. with solar mass M and gravitational constant G (Carroll & Ostlie 2007). We choose 1 M for the host star’s mass because our simulations use solar data and therefore apply to the levels of magnetic activity found in Sun-like stars. We can simulate this one-dimensional reﬂex motion as a function of the time t with the following equation for photocenter displacement: where m is the planet’s mass. The amplitude of the reﬂex motion is the semi-major axis of the host star’s orbit, a. Since the star is in circular orbit about the center of mass of the star-planet system, our formula for displacement due to the planet’s orbit is this semi-major axis modulated by a sinusoidal temporal function with period T. Without loss of generality we restrict the phase to be 0, meaning t = 0 physically corresponds to when the planet is transiting (i.e., closest to or farthest from us). To convert from Equation (7) to angular units, we can divide by the distance to the system in the small angle approximation. However, since we are neglecting instrumental precision for this analysis, the fundamental limit we wish to examine is given by actual oscillations in physical space. Therefore, we just use Equation (7) for the physical displacements. The motion given by Equation (7) is the same at every wavelength, since it corresponds to physical motion of the host star’s center of mass. We can now generate temporal amplitude spectra of a system with both the noise source (stellar activity) and the signal (orbital motion). To do so, the orbital motion given by Equation (7) is added to the time series of photocenter motion due to stellar activity. We then apply the DFT methodology described in Section 2, multiplying both the signal due to stellar activity and orbital motion by the Hanning window and then taking the transform. A sample amplitude spectrum in the Gaia B passband that includes an injected planet orbit is shown in Figure 5. Our goal is to determine, for a given semi-major axis (and thus orbital period, by Equation (6)), the lowest planet mass that can be detected with the simulated astrometric jitter due to stellar activity. We treat this problem in the limit of arbitrarily small angular resolution to study the noise ﬂoor due to just magnetic activity. To determine this detection curve, we implement a simple detection algorithm that searches for the planet signal as a spike in the temporal amplitude spectrum above a 5-sigma threshold, i.e., a signal-to-noise ratio of 5. For converting from the amplitude spectrum to the signal-to-noise ratios with respect to period, we ﬁrst de-trend the amplitude spectrum by subtracting the median at each point. This median is computed over a window of radius 8 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. Because the resolution of data points is low at high periods, we count signals that are within 3 points of each other as the same detection, since these are likely delta functions with some ﬁnite width due to the low resolution. This complete detection scheme is shown for the Gaia B simulation in Figure 5, where the injected planet orbit shows up in the signal-to-noise plot as a detection with S/N > 5. Note that this is a relatively simple detection criterion, but (as demonstrated in the case of Figure 5) it does not result in any false positives for our data set. Of course, for elliptical orbits and irregular sampling, techniques such as those used in radial velocity detection (e.g., the Lomb-Scargle Periodogram (VanderPlas 2018)) would be employed, and more sophisticated detection algorithms used. Such approaches would likely only change the detectable planet threshold by a factor of a few. Using the detection scheme described in Section 3, for a planet with semi-major axis of 1 au, we ﬁnd that the lowest detectable planet mass across any passband is 0.01 M in the Small-JASMINE passband. In contrast, in the Gaia G band, we can detect planets at 1 au down to masses of 0.03 M . These numbers are obtained by successively increasing the planet mass injected into the simulation and noting the lowest mass where the planet signal is ﬁrst detectable. (See Section 5 for details.) These planet masses are already small in the single-band case because we are treating this problem in the limit of inﬁnite telescope resolution and rapid (daily) cadence; planet masses this low would not be detectable by Gaia astrometry, for example. Therefore, it is still in our interest to ﬁnd techniques for noise mitigation to reduce the noise ﬂoor due to stellar magnetic activity. Motivated by how stellar magnetic features contribute to photometry at diﬀerent amounts in diﬀerent passbands, as demonstrated in Figure 2, we explore how leveraging cross-wavelength correlations can help reduce this noise ﬂoor. We begin by comparing the correlations in astrometric jitter due to magnetic activity across each pair of passbands. At a given time, the location of these magnetic features on the solar disk is the same at all wavelengths, but the amount that each feature biases the photocenter will vary by wavelength because the contrasts of each feature are wavelength-dependent. Therefore, we expect some scaling factor between the X displacement in one passband and the X displacement in another. These correlations and scaling factors are shown in Figure 6 for our data set, where at each epoch in the simulation, we have plotted the displacement in one passband against the displacement in the other. We use the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient r to measure correlation between two data samples x and y, with mean values x and y, respectively, and each with n data points. This value is determined by the following equation: Some pairs of passbands are well-correlated (i.e., r is close to 1), whereas others, such as pairings between Gaia bands and the Small-JASMINE (SJ) passband, are poorly correlated (indicated by the cloudiness of the points). These patterns are partly explained by the spectral proximity of the passbands, because the distributions and relative contrasts between magnetic features are most similar at nearby wavelengths. The trends in correlation can also be attributed to the types of magnetic features that dominate the photocenter motion at diﬀerent wavelengths. In the Gaia passbands, bright faculae play a dominant role for periods longer than a solar rotation, since few starspots live that long but most faculae do. In the near-infrared region, on the other hand, facular contrast is far lower, so photocenter motion is dominated by starspots even at longer timescales, despite few of them lasting suﬃciently long. Comparing across these two regimes, which are dominated by diﬀerent types of magnetic features, therefore leads to low correlations in apparent motion due to stellar activity. These traits, and in particular the excellent correlation between the brightness of faculae observed at visible wavelengths, is demonstrated in Unruh et al. (1999). Similarly, only some pairs of passbands have lines of best ﬁt with slope M far from 1. These are pairs where the relative contrast between magnetic features is very diﬀerent between the two passbands. For example, the pair of Small-JASMINE and Gaia B gives rise to the farthest slope from 1, at M = 0.31. Referring to Figure 2, we see that Gaia B has high contrast between diﬀerent types of features compared to the near-infrared range, where every type of magnetic feature approaches similar levels of irradiance. Photocenter motion due to stellar magnetic activity is therefore much greater in Gaia B than in Small-JASMINE, accounting for the slope far from 1. Generally, we see that some pairs of passbands have motion due to stellar activity that is very well-correlated with non-unity slope, with less motion in the photocenter for the redder band. For one such pair, labelled passbands 1 and 2, let A and A be their amplitude spectra (the set of amplitudes at each period), respectively, with scaling factor ∼ A /A . This M is really the slope of the line of best ﬁt between the X displacements in passbands 1 and 2. 10 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. For appropriate passband pairs, A should have a higher signal-to-noise ratio at the planet’s orbital period compared to and . This process could therefore allow for lower detectable planet masses, using information from two passbands instead of just one. An example of this noise mitigation process is shown in Figure 7 for the Gaia R and Gaia B passbands. We see that the planet signal is not detected in each individual passband, but combining them with this scaling and subtraction method allows for a planet detection. there is a planet detection using the methodology described in Section 3. If there is, we return this planet mass as the lowest detectable one. If not, we increase the planet mass slightly and repeat this process, until we ﬁnd a detection. The resulting detection curves trend downwards as the semi-major axis increases, since the amplitude of orbital reﬂex motion in the host star scales linearly with the planet’s semi-major axis. We see that even without noise mitigation, some passbands are better than others for planet detection. At 1 au, we ﬁnd that across all passbands, the median detectable planet mass for a Sun-like star is 0.034 M 12 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. where l and u are the indices of the semi-major axis values closest to 0.7 and 1.5 au, respectively. According to our deﬁnition for these scores, we see that for planet detection, Score > 1 → helps. (13) Score = 1 → does not help or hurt. Score < 1 → hurts. for ﬁt parameters α, β, and C. Fitting with SciPy’s implementation of non-linear least-squares, the resulting parameter values and their errors are as follows: The result of this ﬁt is plotted in the background of Figure 9. Because of the clear trend in favor of high correlation and slope far from 1 for higher scores, we conclude that for this noise mitigation technique, passband pairs should be chosen such that the astrometric jitter due to magnetic activity is well-correlated in both bands but with a scaling factor that is far from 1 between the displacements in each passband. We have demonstrated that for Sun-like stars, using multi-wavelength noise mitigation can successfully attenuate noise due to stellar magnetic activity, relative to the reﬂex motion induced in that star by an orbiting planet. For planet detection, this noise mitigation therefore reduces the noise ﬂoor due to stellar activity. Around the habitable 14 Kaplan-Lipkin et al. zone (deﬁned above as 0.7 → 1.5 au), with an appropriate pair of passbands, this corresponds to improving planet mass detection with stellar astrometry by a factor of up to 6.25. We found that the pair of passbands for which this strategy is most eﬀective are pairs with high correlation and a signiﬁcant scaling factor between activity-induced apparent motion in the two passbands. Pairs of passbands where the relative contrasts between types of magnetic features are very diﬀerent were the ones with scaling factor farthest from 1. This explains why, among the visible bands, pairing Gaia R with Gaia B or Gaia G, both of which have relative contrasts similar to each other but diﬀerent from Gaia R, works better than pairing Gaia B with Gaia G. We also see that correlation is lowest when pairing visible passbands with the near-infrared passband. This pattern can be explained by the spot-dominated nature of the near-infrared region compared to the faculae-dominated visible region. Since spots are much more short-lived than faculae, pairing passbands across these two regimes leads to low correlation. On the other hand, close spectral proximity between neighboring passbands means the relative contributions of dark spots and bright faculae remain largely unchanged between the two bands, giving rise to high correlations. Selecting pairs of passbands according to these observations, so that they are highly-correlated with a scaling factor far from 1, would help with noise reduction of stellar magnetic activity. Our results indicate that two visible-light passbands, with diﬀerent levels of relative contrasts between magnetic features, may be the best candidates for such missions. In our analysis, we assumed circular orbits for the planets with entirely edge-on motion. For more general elliptical orbits, we expect spikes in the spectrum at higher-frequency harmonics, and the results may increase lowest detectable planet masses. However, this assumption should only not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the relative scaling between single- and multi-band astrometry (i.e., the score of each pair of passbands). Another relevant assumption was taking the orbital orientation to be such that the planet- and stellar activityinduced motion was almost maximally aligned, meaning we were treating a near-worst-case scenario. Other features of the star itself, such as inclination and metallicity, may complicate planet detection and the mass curves. Their eﬀects on solar data have been explored by Sowmya et al. (2021). These considerations again should not signiﬁcantly impact the reduction factor from noise mitigation, despite their eﬀects on individual detection curves. The SATIRE-S model used for the astrometry simulations derived its distributions of stellar magnetic features from solar magnetograms and intensity ratio images, meaning our results apply to Sun-like stars with similar levels of magnetic activity. Stars of other stellar types have diﬀerent magnetic activity signatures (Ol´ah et al. 2016), and in particular late-type and young stars may be more photospherically active. Additionally, our study assumed a telescope with inﬁnite resolution and no fundamental noise, so that we could focus on the noise ﬂoor due to just stellar magnetic activity. In reality, the lowest detectable planet masses we found will be much lower than planet masses found by actual astrometry missions, due to the observational limitations on astrometric precision. Considerations about spectral radiance would also need to factor into a choice of ﬁlters for a mission. As searching for exoplanets via stellar astrometry becomes more viable, we recommend that missions with this objective consider performing astrometry in more than one passband, to allow for mitigation of noise due to stellar activity. Ideally, these passbands would be chosen to be well-correlated (e.g., close spectral proximity) with a scaling factor for astrometric jitter far from 1. This way, noise induced by stellar magnetic activity should not be a signiﬁcant barrier to planet detection with astrometry of Sun-like stars. This research was largely inspired by discussions with Peter Graham, Surjeet Rajendran, and Michael Fedderke about sources of astrometric noise in the context of gravitational wave detection. Our work beneﬁted as well from discussions with Monica Bobra and Meng Jin about Solar Dynamics Observatory data. The entire Gemini Planet Imager group provided an incredibly supportive and collaborative environment within which to conduct this research; thank you especially to Eric Nielsen and Lea Hirsch for their mentorship and advice at group meetings and beyond. We also wish to thank the Orbitize team, and particularly Sarah Blunt and Jason Wang, for their helpful contributions regarding orbit-ﬁtting. Finally, we thank the Stanford Physics Department’s Undergraduate Research Program for funding this research. <title>Software: IPython (Perez & Granger 2007), NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020), Matplotlib</title>