 mática e Estatística, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brazil and Instituto Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Campus Rolante, Brazil e Estatística, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brazil Self-Sovereign Identity is a user-centric identity model. In this model, the use r maintains and controls their data. When requested by a service provider, user data is sent directly by the user, without the intermediation of third parties. Thus, in Self -Sovereign Identity, the participation of known identity providers for proof of ide nt ity is reduced, which increases user privacy. This identity model has attracted the attention of researchers and organizations around the world. All this interest increased the number of scientiﬁc articles published on the subject. The analysis of published materials showed that ideas and proposals are very diverse and dispersed. Although there are few systematic reviews, they lack methodological rigor and are limited to a small subset of published works. This study presents a rigorous systematic mapping and systematic literature review covering theoretical and practical advances in Self-Sovereign Identity. We identiﬁed and aggregated evidence from publications to answer four research questions, resulting in a classiﬁcation scheme used to categorize and review publications. Open chall enges are also discussed, providing recommendations for future work. CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy; Additional Key Words and Phrases: Self-Sovereign Identity, SSI, identity, identity management, ide ntity and access management, privacy, systematic mapping, mapping, systematic literature review, literature review, review, survey ACM Reference Format: Frederico Schardong and Ricardo Custódio. 2021. Self-Sovereign Identity: A Systematic Map and Review. ACM Comput. Surv. 1, 1, Article 1 (August 2021), The ability to prove t hat a person is who she claims to be is fundamental to human interactions in society, whether in the physical world or on the Internet. The proof usually consists of presenting a credential, which allows the identiﬁcation of a person. This credential is a set of attributes and is called an identity document or simply identity [19, 66]. We can classify identity documents into three diﬀerent representation formats. The ﬁrst format is t he traditional physical document. This format usually consists o f a paper document or plastic card, and the attributes that identify the person are printed on these materials. Paper and plastic cards are made with care to prevent them from being easily counterfeited. When a person wants to prove who she is, she presents her physical document. The identiﬁcation is made by the relying party (RP) that wants to identify the person by reading and che c king the veracity of the attributes. One of the crucial attributes of this type of document is the photo of the person’s face. In this case, the identity document is known as a face badge. The second format is a digital identity document. It can be perceived as the digital visual representation of the physical document and is often instantiated on mobile devices, e.g. [61]. Veriﬁcation of integrity and authenticity is performed using crypt ographic techniques such as d igital signature. This signature and identity attributes are usual ly included as a QR code so that the RP can verify the integrity and veracity of t his identity document. The third format is the electronic identity docu ment. This is the identity use d in the virtual world, all owing people to aut henticate themselves and consume electronic services on the Web. Unlike the digital document, which is a visual representation, the electronic document is designed from the ground up to be used electronically, eliminating visual inspection to verify its veracity and integrity. These processes are p erformed through multi-factor authentication [105] and crypt ographic techniques such as digital signature and public-key cryptography [136]. For example, using a password that is only known to the identity holder and a key displayed in a time-based o ne-time password service [40, 150]. These three forms o f identity need to be resistant to forgery, fraud, and personal information leakage. Therefore, the collection, storage, and processing of identity-related data must be done with great care, promoting t he use of adequate data protection mechanisms. While each of the three forms of identity listed above is subject to fraud, the one that requires the most control is the electronic version. There are numerous reports o f fraud involving the misuse of electronic identities [65, 96]. While there are examples of self-issued identity documents such as business cards and curriculu m vitae, the vast majority of identities in use are issued by t rusted third parties. For example, national-level identity documents such as driver’s licenses, identity cards, and passports are commonly issued by the government [13] or private companies authorized for this purpose [51]. In tod ay’s digital world, big companies like Google and Facebook issue electronic identities. They created these identities to identify, aut henticate, authorize and provide user attributes for their internal services. However, these identities have become a p owerful tool to identify users not only to access the services provided by these companies, but also by various other service providers (SPs). Thus, these companies act as identity providers (IdP). Many companies have taken advantage of these IdPs to outsource the registration, identiﬁcation, and authentication of their customers. Using IdPs has many advantages and disadvantages. As an advantage, the user can have a single identity to authenticate to multiple SPs. A possible downside is that a single IdP holds data for a large number of users. Storing people’s electronic identities in a few IdPs has been of great concern because these few dat a silos hold the data of many users [7]. These giant data silos have become attr active targets for hackers [56] as they contain high-value assets that can be misused [65] or even traded with institutions not authorized by users [96]. Although the vast majority of users naively trust IdPs, many users and companies are uncomfortable with the obligation to use and trust these entities. In this context, Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) [7] has drawn attention, as it improves people’s privacy, providing them with the means to store and manage their data. SSI has the potential to disrupt today’s electronic identity ecosystem by not requiring people to actively use IdPs for their identiﬁcation and authentication with RP. Despite the provision of sovereignty over the digital presence, SSI presents new challenges that must be overcome for its wide adoption. The challenges are conceptu al and pragmatic. The main conceptual challenge is understanding what a self-sovereign identity is and what constitutes a self-sovereign system. The pragmatic challenges include, but are not limited to, how to coexist and migrate the identity stored and managed in existing IdPs to the new model, how to trust data from other self-sovereign identities, and how to help the user handle the tasks of management, backup, and recovery of private data. The advantages of this new identity paradigm over tr aditional mod els has attracted the at tention of researchers and p rofessionals in recent years, which has led to a growing number of publications on the subject. There are al so some initiatives to review and co ndense the knowledge produced so far. However, the existing reviews do not cover all t he aspects currently considered important on the subject. For example, they fail to: (i) capt ure publications that contribute to t he conceptual debate about what t he term self-sovereign identity means; and (ii) include eﬀorts that introduce new p roblems and solutions, but that are not implementations that cover the entire scope of the subject, such as Sovrin [ This article presents a comprehensive systematic mapp ing and review of scientiﬁc and non-scientiﬁc works that contribute to t he debate about what SSI means and works t hat present a practical challenge concerning SSI and oﬀer a solution for it. We followed a systematic method of searching and selecting p ublications, which was guided by four research questions. As our work is systematic, it may be reprodu ced and updated in the future to cover new work. Our results consist of an analysis of publication frequency, venues, co-references and co-authorships, and three maps that map the reviewed literature, providing the reader with an overview of the state of the art of SSI literature. Finally, open challenges and recommendations are discussed, which are useful for researchers and practitioners working with SSI. The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section description o f SSI. The existing secondary works t hat review the SSI literature are provided in Section 3. The methodology adopt ed in this study is described in Section open challenges and shortco mings in Section 2 PRELIMINARIES In this section, we present the background ne c essary to accompany this study. We start by explaining electronic identities, how their use has evolved, and then we detail SSI. 2.1 Electronic Identity In the physical world, trust in relations between diﬀerent entities involves identifying the communicating parts. Proof of identity is carried out through authentication factors previously agreed between the parties or wit h the assistance of trusted third parties. Typically, physical devices are used as authentication factors. For example, it is not uncommon for people to be identiﬁed through a visual inspection of their identity document, followed by a facial badge veriﬁcation. Likewise, in the electronic world, communicating parties need to have a certain level of assurance of the other parties’ identity. This assurance is done through data communication networks such as the Internet, using electronic identities. Like a physical identity, an electronic identity is usually deﬁned as a set of attributes that help describe or qualify an entity [ Consequently, electronic identities are not just copies of physical identities, such as a passport or driver’s license. They 140] and uPort [146]). 66]. Some authors prefer to restrict this deﬁnition to speciﬁc contexts to improve its accuracy [35, 44, 98]. are created, used , and destroyed according to the user’s desire, often containing only the minimum attribut es necessary to accomplish what is needed in that context. For example, a seller may have an electronic identity on eBay [34] without revealing their name, age, or country o f residence. The only information that co ncerns others is whether this seller has a history of positive transactions [110]. All identities, whether physical or electronic, are subject to the existence of mechanisms to verify ownership. That is, they need mechanisms to carry out the appropriate identiﬁcation and authen tication of users [72]. The identiﬁcation process consists of an electronic identity holder showing a unique att ribute in a given context, i.e., an identiﬁer used to distinguish it from all other electronic identities in that context [46]. The classic example is providing an email address when subscribing to a subscription service. The next step is to authenticate the identiﬁed entity by verifying a securit y proof, traditionally performed through a secret password or digital signature, thus ensuring that the holder of the electronic identity is its owner de facto. In the example of the subscription service given above, providing a code or clicking a link received by email provided proves that the email address belongs to the holder. Performing identiﬁcation and authentication is crucial in our digital society, allowing services to be made available electronically to citizens. Therefore, this identiﬁcation and authentication activity should be done by a specialized service trusted by all involved entities. Such services are provided by systems that govern electronic identity, so-called identity and access management (IAM) systems. 2.2 The evolution of IAM models In the early days of the web, SPs had to implement IAM sol utions to identify and authenticate clients to oﬀer personalized products and services. Thus, such services are called centralized authorities. This model, however, presented a series o f diﬃculties for users concerning usability. M ost users ended up using similar low-entropy passwords on diﬀerent systems, making room for numerous vulnerabilities. This model has spurred many eﬀorts to e ducate users about the dangers of having simple passwords and reusing them across diﬀerent services [114, 139]. The next logical evolution replaced the centralized model with third-party IAM solutions, IdPs. Wit h this new paradigm, users need to be registered in just a few IdPs to access the p lethora of services available on the web. On the other hand, SPs must be registered with the desired IdPs o r federations of IdPs to work with identiﬁed and authenticated users of the IdPs. The interactions between IdP, SP, and the end-user were standardized through token exchange protocol s like SAML [59], OAuth [5 7] and OpenID [1 08]. Although this identity model has dramatically reduced the problematic management of various identiﬁers and passwords for users, it ended up creating few and large silos of valuable private information. The next evolution step was the user-centric model [69]. It was built on the idea that users could use personal authentication devices (PADs), such as smartphones and smartcards, to store authentication credentials from SPs and decide which ones to present, thus eliminating the need for third-party IdPs. However, as pointe d in [7], this model has not gained momentum and is currently understo od as the IdP model with greater u ser control. The current understanding of this model, according to [7], is that the user is aware and must authorize or deny her IdP to share speciﬁc personal attributes requeste d from an SP. Therefore, the current user-centric identity model presents the same issues as the previous model. The Figures1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) d epict the identity models presented above, providing a high-level overview of interactions between user, IdP, and SP. The creation of specialized IAM services, i.e., third-party IdPs, resulted in the emergence of oligopolies of electronic identities [62]. Long-term users o f IdPs are eﬀectively imprisoned by t hem since there is no portability between IdPs. These companies promote their own rules, which, if violated, can remove a user from their platforms. This can be disastrous for individuals who spent years building trusting relationships with SPs, and if banned, they would lose their transaction history and become comp letely unknown. This problem is o f particular importance in the c ase of IdPs that are also social media plat forms, such as Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter, where violations of rules on the social network are often questionable [ 2.3 Self-Sovereign Identity In the early days of the web, the conception of the client-server model shaped the idea that in the digital world, people are users of online systems rather than human beings, i.e., entities that need identiﬁcation, authentication, and authorization to access and perform tasks online [ because it was built on the foundation that servers (companies, online businesses) are more import ant than clients (individuals) and, therefore, d ictate the rights of clients. This web fabric holds to this day and is exacerbated by the need to the creation of legislation, such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [ the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [27], to specify the rights of individuals and their digital data in a society increasingly dependent on digital interactions. The core concept of SSI is that individuals are sovereign over their digital selves and, therefore, have control of their data. This idea fundamentally diﬀerentiates SSI from previous identity models, in which individuals were seen as users. In this new model, sovereign individuals store and manage their data, t hereby controlling who their private data are shared with and to what extent. Although philosophers such as John Locke and Stuart Mill have wr itten about the sovereignty of individuals in past centuries [ and digital identity was mad e by Leﬀreto [ tity"” [89]. Thereafter, the meaning of sovereign identity was debated [91, 122–124] and technolo gy standards were proposed [ laid out what he proposes to be the ten principles of SSI [ First, individuals must have an existence independent of their digital selves, i.e., they cannot exist only virtually. A (self-sovereign) identity works by sharing the desired (digital) aspects of the individual. Second, peopl e must control their identities, owning and managing their at tributes, which does not prohibit them from making claims about other people. Third, people must have access to their data and claims by storing them or being readily available if they are outsourced. Fourth, all systems must be transparent and the underlying algorit hms must be free and open-source, thus Fig. 1. The IAM models. Constant lines represent interactions, and dashed lines mean trust. 97, 147], the ﬁrst commonly accepted [7, 125, 159] connection between the concepts of sovereignty 109, 132]. Signiﬁcant momentum was obtained, especially in academia [102, 143], after Christopher Allen allowing detailed examination by anyone. Fifth, identities must persist forever, or as long as individuals wish. Sixth and seventh, identities and their claims must be portable across diﬀerent systems and technologies, which requires interoperability between standards and implementations. Eighth and ninth, people need to consent to the use and sharing of their data, while disclosure of data must be minimized to the absolute minimum. For instance, to ﬁnd out if a person can buy an alcoholic beverage, it is unnecessary to share the date of birth. Tenth, at the end of the day, individuals must have their rights protected, which means that systems must be designed to avoid censorship and must preserve people’s rights, even to the detriment of systems. In SSI, any assertion regarding a subject is called a claim. A set of one or more claims made by an entity despite a subject is a crede ntial. It could be, fo r instance, a government-issued driving license containing the d ate o f birth, name, and address of a person. Suppose the credential is associated with a revocation list or other revocation method and has crypto graphic material assuring its integrity and identiﬁcation and non-repudiation of its issuer. In that case, it is referred to as a veriﬁable credential (VC) [132]. Furthermore, a tamper-proof cl aim derived from a veriﬁable credential is calle d a veriﬁable claim. Although we will use these terms interchangeably in the remainder of this paper, we will be referring to tamper-proof claims and tamper-proof credentials unless speciﬁed otherwise. Similar to the physical world, where entities issue p hysical credentials to holders in paper or plastic cards, in SSI, entities issue VCs to holders. However, diﬀerent from physical and digital identities, these electronic identity d ocuments allow individuals to choose what attributes (claims) they want to share, which is impossible with physical and digital credentials. They require t he holder to present the entire identity document, thus revealing all its attributes. Suppose that you are asked to prove to have reached the age of majority. With a physical document, it is evident that showing the paper or plastic card will reveal the b irthdate and all other attributes to the RP. The same is true for digital identity documents, which are commonly implemented using X.509 attribut e certiﬁcates [145]. With traditional X.509 certiﬁcates, the whole certiﬁcate has to be shared with the RP to verify the document’s integrity. However, in the context of SSI, you would construct a veriﬁable presentation (VP) stating that: (i) a credential was issued to you by a trusted par ty; (ii) this credential has your birthdate in it; (iii) your birthdate was more than 18 years ago; and (iv) this credential have not been revoked b y the government body. Hence, w hoever receives this V P does not learn your name, birthdate, and any other information in the credential, only that you have reached the age of majority. The recipient of a VP (i.e. the RP) checks: (i) who signed the credential that supports this VP; (ii) if the VP is correctly constructed (i.e. it contains the required information and is not corrupted nor counterfeited); and (iii) whether the credential supporting this VP is valid (i.e. whether the credential was revoked or not). It is important to note that upon verifying who issued the credential on step (i), the RP is free to decide if it trusts the issuer or not. Moreover, step (iii) does not require the RP to inquire the IdP in any particular manner. Revocation registries are publicly available, and the veriﬁcation is done anonymously [24, 25], i.e., not revealing a unique identiﬁer of t he credential. Although individuals are autonomous to issue credentials for themselves in SSI, others are free not to t rust them. For instance, a bank w il l hardly accept a VP of a self-issued credential containing a person’s name and birthdate. This is true both in t he physical world and in SSI. Figure1(d) provides a high-level overview of SSI, where the user (i.e., the holder) can interact with the SP using self-issued credentials or third-party issued credentials. In bo th cases, the SP must tr ust the issuer. Despite the terminology adopted by the SSI literature regarding VP, this concept precedes SSI for many years. Research has been carried out for more than a decad e before SSI on how to share part of a credential, as well predicates over one or more attributes of a credential, without losing integrity and authenticity [24, 28]. The p rimary technique underlying VP is zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) [117]. Generally speaking, a ZKP enables a prover to convince a veriﬁer that she knows a value witho ut revealing the value [ can prove the validity and content of one or more credentials without revealing the whole credentials [ is true for the status of a VC. It is possible to prove that a VC has not been revoked without revealing to the RP an identiﬁcation of the credential and ensuring that the issuer does not know that a quer y for a speciﬁc credential was made [25]. In Figure VP. In this example, three people own and control their electronic identities, each suitable for a diﬀerent context. Each electronic identity has a database of issued and received credentials, and a revocation registry for issued credentials that have been revoked. One of Alice’s electronic identities issues a credential to one of Bob’s ele c tronic identities, for instance, a statement that he is a trusted seller of good wines. Bob then sends a VP of having su ch credential to Carl’s electronic identity used to search and buy wine. Carl, in turn, trusts the issuer of the credential in which that V P was derived (Alice, an internationally recognized winemaker) and procee ds to negotiate with Bob. It should be noted that, in real life, most people will not host revocation registries as they will not issue credentials, which is also the reality with physical and digital identiﬁcation documents. After introducing electronic identities and the evolution of IAMs, we presented SSI to the reader. Next, we present other surveys of SSI and their shortcomings in Section and systematic review in Section 3 RELATED WORK Blockchain technology introduced the idea of distributed ledgers, where consensus among peers deﬁnes the state of the immutable ledger, rather than a central entity with authoritarian control [ mentation of SSI by providing a trusted online st orage of digital identities, credentials, and revocation registries [ However, while blo c kchain assists the development of SSI solutions, it is not a requirement [6, 8, 84, 14 8]. Nonetheless, existing reviews claim t hat SSI necessarily needs blockchain to be implemented [ regards to the review methodology of these works, two surveys p rovided details about their search strategy [ while six did not [ 2 we present a generalized three-actor overview of the end-to-end process of issuing a VC and emitting a Fig. 2. The actors, their electronic identities, and the interactions to issue a credential and present a VP. 32, 48, 71, 83, 102, 162]. Next, we present the existing secondary studies in the ﬁeld of SSI. Kuperberg [78] conducted a systematic review where 43 blockchain-based SSI market oﬀerings were assessed using 75 criteria, covering legislation co mpliance, market availability, costs, and more. He argued that no reviewed application meets all criteria and no SSI solution has: (i) t he maturity of conventional IAM oﬀerings; (ii) a production-level integration st andard (such as OAuth [57] and SAML [59]); and (iii) OS-level integration. Liu et al. [86] systematically reviewed 36 research eﬀorts and patents that introduce SSI applications. They examined these works based on authentication, privacy, and t rust aspects. They argued that, despite blockchain-related innovations, there are still issues and implications remaining, namely: (i) users may lose their blockchain-based identities (wallets) and need to (ii) change their identities, which is trivial in traditional IAM but might be challenging in distributed ledgers; and (iii) the cost of integrating existing systems to the new paradigm. Focusing on the internet of things (IoT), Zhu and Badr [162] surveyed works that use distributed ledgers to provide SSI in the context of IoT devices. They shared Liu et al.’s [86] focus on authentication, privacy, and trust issues and added a fourth: performance. They argued that the trustless environments of IoT devices naturally demand SSI solut io ns. Still, blockchain technology must be carefully explored as sto ring and maintaining public blockchains in IoT devices is resource-prohibitive. Therefore, having small groups of private blockchains could be an alternative. A possible sol ution reported from the literature [161] is that IoT devices could inherit the peer-to-peer trust between their owner entities (human, business, government). Three surveys that do not specify a search method have produced similar outputs despite the comparison of the underlying infrastructure of blockchain-based SSI oﬀerings [48, 71, 83]. They all highlighted what blockchain framework the surveyed work use, the type of the blockchain network (i.e. if they are private, permissioned, permissionless, or other). Lim et al. [83] reviewed 15 for-proﬁt and non-proﬁt company-made, government-related, and open-source applications, they highlighted that SSI presents the ideal solution for proper user-centric, secure and cost-eﬀective IAM. Kaneriya and Patel [71] reviewed 6 SSI systems, enumerating future enhancements that, according to the authors, each system should focus on. Lastly, Gilani et al. [48] reviewed 8 SSI oﬀerings, detailing which support selective disclosure of personal information, how cryptographic keys are managed, and b lockchain-speciﬁc details such as whether credentials are stored either on or oﬀ ledger and the usage of smart contracts. Smart contracts are a piece of soft ware that runs on the ledger automatically and t ransparently for everyone to verify [160]. The aut hors of [32] described 10 SSI systems that use blockchain wit hout specifying how these were selected. Nonetheless, they conducted an analysis of these works with regards to their attendance to the ten principles of SSI [7], individually detailing which principle each reviewed paper satisﬁes. Diﬀerently from the previous surveys, Mühle et al. [102] reviewed what the authors call “four basic components of SSI”: (i) identiﬁcation; (ii) authentication; (iii) veriﬁable claims; and (iv) attribute storage. They discusse d how diﬀerent research work and market oﬀerings try to provide solutions for each of the fou r components. Secondary work already carried out shows that there is a growing number of st udies in this area. However, there is a need for more systematic identiﬁcation of SSI studies, regardless of technological implementations. Previous surveys investigate practical and technical aspects of SSI systems. Nevertheless, they do not evaluate conceptual discussions about SSI nor works that present and try to solve pragmatic challenges that are not entire SSI systems. In this work, on the other hand, we are interested in systematically discovering and investigating research materials that: (i) extend or refute Allen’s ten principles of self-sovereign identity [7]; (ii) introd uce deﬁnitions or formalization to SSI; or (iii) present and solve practical problems in the SSI ecosystem. The key diﬀerences between previous surveys and ours are summarized in Table1. 4 METHODOLOGY As the primary research eﬀorts surrounding a given topic evolve, secondary studies are needed to keep track of advances and developments. In compu ter science, two types of secondary studies became popular in recent years [ (i) systematic mapping [ a protocol/methodology t o identify and interpret relevant research work, the former is d esigned to produce a broad overview and to discover research trends, while the latter is targeted to aggregate evidence to summarize and answer narrower research questions. In this study, we attack both challenges. We followed the methodology introduced by Petersen et al. [ systematically surveyed mapping studies. These guidelines demand for: (i) the deﬁnition of objectives and research questions (section criteria to ensure only relevant material is reviewed (section evidences from papers regarding the research questions (section 4.4); (v) to present the reader how selected mat erials will be classiﬁe d (section 4.1 Research estions The objective of this systematic study is fourfold: (i) to identify and map SSI-related publications; (ii) to investigate what are the conceptual advances made to the informal d eﬁnition of SSI [ SSI; and (iv) to examine practical problems and solutions related to SSI. These objectives lead t o the following research questions (RQs): • RQ-1: When, where, and by whom were SSI studies published ? • RQ-2: What conceptual ideas have been introduced or refuted? • RQ-3: What properties or formal deﬁnitions have been speciﬁed? • RQ-4: What practical problems have been introduced and solved? 4.2 Search Strategy The ﬁr st step in our search was to specify a search string relevant to the research questions mentioned above. Rather than creating a potentially restrictive search query following PICOC [75] or any other method to frame search queries, we searched for “self-sovereign identity” and variations in the title, author keywords, and abstract. Our search string is Liu et al. [ Zhu and Badr [ Lim et al. [ Kaneriya and Patel [ Gilani et al. [ Dib and Toumi [ Mühle et al. [ 4.1); (ii) a str ategy to identify relevant studies (section 4.2); (iii) objective inclusion and exclusion general on purpose. We wanted to include as many relevant articles as possible. Furthermore, we applied no restrictions on the year of publication, t he number of pages, o r conference/journal. Our complete query string is as follows. On June 25, 2021, this search string was queried on ACM Digital Library [11], IEEE Xplore [64], ScienceDirect [37] and Springer Link [135], which are databases hosting popular comput er science conferences and journals. To expand the reach of our database search, we also searched the Scopus Preview [39], Web of Science [29] and Google Scholar [49]. Additionally, we used Google Patents [50] and applied the search str ing on the title and abstract of patents on t he same day, ﬁnding 11 results. Table2 shows the number of search results returned from the queries. We then submitted the articles and patents t o the study selection process described below, producing an initial set of works to be reviewed. This set of results served as input to a snowballing process, which helps to ensure that any relevant publication was included in this review. 4.3 Study Selection The study selection process has t hree phases. In the ﬁrst phase, both duplicate results and articles republished in extended formats are removed. The software Mendeley [38] was used to discover and remove the duplicates. A ﬁrst screening of the search results revealed that some papers do not belong to the ﬁeld of computer science or are outside the scope of our review. We then created two inclusion criteria and one exclusion criterion t o narrow our search. Table3 describes these criteria. In short, the exclusion criterion ﬁlters out research work outside of computer science, while the inclusion criteria select papers that make contributions to SSI according to our research questions. Articles need to satisfy at least one inclusion criteria. It is important to note that, despite arguably incorporating practical progress (w.r.t.IC-2), we are not mapping and reviewing st andalone SSI solutio ns (such as Sovrin [140] and uPor t [146]). Although multiple surveys [78, 83, 86, 1 62] focus on these works, they aim to tackle an issue not yet precisely deﬁned. Therefore, when it comes to practical progress, we focus on works that present speciﬁc pragmatic concerns related to any facet of the SSI e cosystem and oﬀer a solution. For instance, consider an article that points out the challenge of recovering lost keys in SSI and introd uce a novel solution for this problem. This work would be in accordance wit hIC-2. However, suppose a research paper reporting some implementation of SSI for IoT. While it might be a relevant contribution to the IoT literature, if it does not present a problem concerning SSI in general and a solution for such problem, then this work does not satisfy In the second phase, not in the area of computer science. Next, in the third phase, the remaining studies are obt ained and read in full, observing their compliance with removed. Our three-phase study selection process was execut ed ﬁve times, as presented in Figure regarding the outputs of the database search, and the se cond with the results of the patent search. The combined result of these two executions was a set of 42 works used as the basis for both forward and b ackward snowballing [ In short, backward snowballing consists of reviewing all citations in a do cument, while forward snowballing ﬁnds other works that referenced it. The snowballing was repeated until no new work was found that satisﬁed our selection process, which required three runs. The remaining 57 articles constitute our result set. We should point out that each paper was independently assessed by two researchers in every stage of the selection process, and a conﬂict resolutio n meeting was organized. We point the interested reader elsewhere [118] for a list of all papers and our evaluation regarding their inclusion or exclusion for all ﬁve runs of the study selection process. 4.4 Data Extraction We adapted the Petersen et al.’s [ item; (ii) a description, and; (iii) the RQ that it responds to, as shown in Tab le the articles or their metadata available online, except for the Study ID, which was generated manually. After reading a pilot set of articles, two Conceptual and two Practical data items were created to coll ect evidence and answer RQs. The articles and patents returned from the database search and snowballing, together with the evidence collected for completing the data extraction form, can be found elsewhere [ 4.5 Classification Petersen et al. [ comparison between two mappings. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst systematic mapping of SSI. Therefore, we present a new classiﬁcation strategy. We created this classiﬁcation following Petersen et al.’s [ keywording methodology, which has three steps: (i) the researcher reads the abstracts (introd uction and conclusion too, if the abstract is of low quality), extracting keywords and concepts that indicate the contribution of the articl e and the context of the research; (ii) the set of keywords is combined to constitute a high-level u nderstanding of the research contribution; and (iii) the ﬁnal set of keywords is clustered to form the map categories. The last step is the 107] advocate reusing classiﬁcation schemes from previous studies, claiming that it allows a direct result of the continuous act of creating, updating, and merging categories, together with the classiﬁcation of articles to t he new categories. 4.6 Threats to Validity The following threats to validity are of great importance and need to be pointed out [107]: (i) descriptive; (ii) study identiﬁcation; and (iii) data extraction and classiﬁcation. To reduce the threat o f inaccurately collecting observations from research papers (descriptive validity), we have developed and used the data collection for m described above to collect relevant evidence. The ﬁrst author applie d the data collection form, and then these results were evaluated by the second autho r. Next, to mitigate the possibility of missing relevant work (study identiﬁcation validity), we did not restrict our database search by year of publication or venue. Besides, the database search was supplemented with backward and forward snowballing. Researcher bias and human error dur ing data extraction and classiﬁcation cannot be compl etely eliminated, as these processes are matters of human judgment. The second author evaluated the data extraction and classiﬁcation performed by the ﬁ rst author to reduce these threats. Furthermore, it is essential to mention that identity management has been studied for decades. Therefore, numerous research eﬀorts can arguably contribute to the many facets of SSI (e.g., trust, key management, certiﬁcate) despite being conducted before the term self-sovereign identity was conceived. Ultimately, d eciding which of these works may contain a valuable contribution t o SSI is limited by the researcher’s interpretation. Therefore, to suppress this interpretation bias, especially in the snowballing process, we mapped and surveyed only works that explicitly mention the term self-sovereign identity (or a synonym like self-sovereignty). 5 RESULTS In this section, we present in ﬁve parts the outcomes of our systematic mapping and review. First, we describe the results of t he keywording strategy to devise the classiﬁcation, and these serve as a basis for reporting the data collected concerning our research questions. Then, based on our categorization, the fo ur research questions are addressed. 5.1 Classification The keywording metho dology [ facets are mutually exclusive, Venn diagrams allow classifying publications with diﬀerent levels of granularity. This less rigid form of mapping presents an ideal starting point for categorizing research in SSI. Future secondary work can build upon our model to produce taxonomies or other types of classiﬁcations. The diagram on the left side of Figure4 is used to map the research eﬀorts that in our dat a extraction process have ﬁlled in the data itemsAdd Concept or Refute Concept and thus help answer RQ-2. On the other hand, the diagram on the r ight is used twice. First, it is used to map publications that have completed the data itemFormal Model, in relation toRQ-3. Then, it is used to map publications with pragmatic contributions, i.e., that ﬁlled the data items Novel Problem and Proposed Solutions, therefore in relation to RQ-4. The left diagram categories (Add and Refute) and the right diagram categories (Identity, Credential and Trust) are the star ting points for our classiﬁcation. In the following sections, these diagrams are augmented, and new intersections are drawn, which increases the depth and level of detail, thus creating the maps that answer our second, third, and fourth research questions. While the distinction between adding and refuting concepts is clear, the boundaries between the categories in the diagram on the right are not. For a work to be placed entirely in t he identity category, it must not involve issuing, revoking, storing credentials, or presenting claims, nor challenges related to establishing trust between identities. Articles on these two subjects are classiﬁed in the credential and trust categories, respectively. However, if a researched paper, for example, primarily addresses key management and claim presentation, it would be classiﬁed in the intersection of the identity and credential categories. 5.2 When, where, and by whom were SSI studies published? To answerRQ-1, we aggregate the General data items collected using our data extraction form. The results are discussed next. 5.2.1 Frequency of publication. Regarding publication frequency, we aggregate publications by year in Table 5. Although it provides a rough overview, the growing academic interest in SSI is evident. In ad dition, we see ﬁner details by applying the classiﬁcation described above to annual publication frequency. Figure5 shows the number of publications according to our classiﬁcation. Three publications were made in 2016 , including t he introduction of the term SSI and t he ten principles by Allen [7]. Furthermore, both works published in 2016 and 2017 consist o f conceptual writings that extend the discussion introduced by Allen, proposing new principles/requirements for SSI [1, 7, 9, 33, 120, 149] together w ith the coherent refutation of some [120]. Starting in 201 8, research eﬀorts began to introduce new pragmatic problems and solu tions to the SSI ecosystem, along with mathematical formalism that, although fewer in number, help mature SSI towards a well-deﬁned area of research. 5.2.2 Publishing Venues. On the subject of publication venues, most publications (thirt y articles) took place in congresses, symposia, forums, or workshops as shown in Table thirty ar ticles in conferences and four master’s thesis shows that SSI has b een gaining momentum as a research ﬁeld. However, it is in its infancy, as there is only o ne doctoral thesis and only nine articles in journals. The co nferences selected by authors to publish their works vary widely. Table posia, forums, and workshops the mapped articl es were published. Although there are thirty articles mapped in this type of venue, only six conferences received two publications. The other eighteen papers are spread across eighteen diﬀerent conventions. Moreover, the colloquia held by the IEEE are the most popular choice, which received thirteen papers spread across ten conferences. The same trend is true for essays in scientiﬁc journals, as shown in Table of the nine studies were published in IEEE journals. 5.2.3 Authors. Having the authors’ names collected through our data extraction form, Figure 6 shows a co-authorship network [ 113] created using Gephi [15]. Each vertex represents an author and edges map published works between IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communica-3, 116] tions Annual Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Tech-84] nologists them in this weighted undirected graph. For ease of reading, we display edge weights in diﬀerent line widths. Vertexes also change in diameter, representing the number of publications each author has. The vast majority of edges of this network graph are thin, showing that most authors have a single publication. In addition, this disconnected graph also indicates that most of the work was done alo ne or in isolated groups. Fig. 6. Co-authorship network graph, where vectors represent authors and edges the co-authorship of one or more works. The authors w ith the most publicatio ns in this mapping are Andreas Grüner, Alexander Mühle, and Christoph Meinel. They have two articles pub lished together [53, 54] and another two with Tatiana Gayvoronskaya [52, 102]. Therefore, bot h the vertices and the edges that connect the vertices representing these three author s have the most prominent weight in this graph (i.e., the thickest vertices and edges). Two researchers have three publications included in this research, Martin Schanzenbach and Andreas Abraham. Schanzenbach’s publications include his Ph.D. thesis [115], and two articles with Jul ian Schütte, one sharing with Georg Bramm [116] and the other with Thomas Kilian and Christian Banse [117]. Abraham’s works are a technical report [1], a research paper shared with Felix Hörandner, Olamide Omolola, and Sebastian Ramacher [2], and a third paper also co -authored w ith Felix Hörandner, which included Christof R abensteiner and Stefan More [3]. Furthermore, Stefan More published a second paper with other authors [5]. In addition to the aforementioned authors with two mapped publications (Tatiana Gayvoronskaya, Julian Schütte, Felix Hörandner, and Stefan More), there are another seven groups of authors with two publications included in our search: (i) Kalman C. Toth and Alan Anderson-Priddy have pub lished an article together [143] and a second including Ann Cavoukian [144]; (ii) Zoltan A. Lux, Felix Beierle and Sebastian Zickau have worked separately with Sebastian Gondor [92], and with Dirk Thatmann [93]; (iii) Hye Young Paik and Liming Zhu pu blished an article along with Yue Liu, Qinghua Lu, Xiwei Xu, and Shiping Chen [87], and another article with Yashothara Shanmugarasa and Salil S. Kanhere [127]; (iv) Kyung-Hoon Kim, Seungjoo Lim, and Dong-Yeop Hwang published one paper with Ki-Hyung Kim [73] and a second one with Min-Hyung Rhie [82]; (v) Jørgen Ellingsen’s master thesis [36] and an article with Abylay Satybaldy, and Mariusz Nowostawski [112]; (vi) Christopher Allen’s ten p rinciples [7] and the Decentralized Identiﬁers (DIDs) standard [109] with Drummond Reed, Ryan Gr ant, Markus Sabadello, Manu Sporny, and Dave Longley; and (vii) the latter two autho rs share the veriﬁable credentials (VC) standard [132] authorship with David Chadwick. Next, we present the co-reference network of the surveyed literature in Figure7. In this directed graph, vertices represent publications, and edges represent references between articles, where the destination of an edge means that the source of the edge references this work. The number of received citations deﬁnes the vertices’ diameter, and the vertices’ color is the p ublishing year. This chart highlights the importance of Allen’s ten principles [7], referenced by thirty-one publications. Likewise, the W3C standards related to SSI, namely DID [109] and VC [132], were the second and third most referenced works with, respectively, twelve and ten references. The ﬁrst survey of SSI [102], published in 2018, is the fourth most referenced work, with eight mentions. Regarding cross-references, thirty-seven works are not referenced by any surveyed p ublication. These thirty-seven unreferenced works are the thirteen publications from 2021, sixteen from eighteen from 20 20, seven from thirteen from 2019, and one from ﬁve from 2018. Likewise, ﬁfteen publications do not cite any mapped work, in which four are from 2021, two from 2020, four from 2019, one from 201 8, three from 2017, and one from 2016. One of the reasons for these ﬁfteen publications without references to other mapped works is the scope of our survey. We excluded SSI platforms such as Sovrin, Uport, and Jolocom, which some of these works reference. 5.3 RQ-2: What conceptual ideas have been introduced or refuted? Christopher Allen [7] stated that there is no consensus on a deﬁnition of SSI, then he proposed ten guiding principles for a starting point, as explained in Section2. Our second research question aims to map fur ther discussions regarding understanding what SSI is. [156] [103] [127] Following our protocol, we mapp ed fourteen pap ers that extend All en’s debate about what SSI means. Figure shows this map, which mainly consists of additional speciﬁcations/deﬁnitions. These are organized into three mutually exclusive sub sets of works and ﬁve intersecting subsets, one of which groups together papers that refute some of Allen’s principles. The three mutually exclusive subsets are as follows. First, Allen’s article makes up a unitary set [ works include the requirement of veriﬁable claims in SSI systems [ vocating the need for GDPR compliance in SSI systems is also a unitary set [ GDPR compliance, the author of [1] debated how SSI systems can use veriﬁable claims to comply with the following articles of the GDPR: (i) consent; (ii) pseudonymization; (iii) right to erasure; (iv) records of processing activities; (v) data portability; and (vi) data protection by design and by default. The ﬁve subsets of papers with intersecting philosophical matters expose shared ideas of what their authors conceive as mandatory for SSI. The authors of [9, 36, 104] speciﬁed that any approach to SSI must be free of charge. Furthermore, in addition to the idea of not having to pay to be part of an SSI system, the authors of [ of having the assurance that peopl e’s data must be recoverable in the event of personal device loss. Along with [33], both [1] and [112] state that no central authority should own or be responsible for an SSI solution. These three articles, along with the papers that advocate that SSI should have no cost [9, 36, 104], have attractive points at ﬁrst. However, on further insp ection, these requirements can make it diﬃcult to develop solutions and build business for SSI. Developers and t echnicians would have to look for alternative means of revenue and share control over their products. To some extent, this is what Evernym [42], a for-proﬁt organization, d id when it spun oﬀ Sovrin, a nonproﬁt foundation maintained by various organizations [1 42]. However, it is not free. Although end users can join the network, receive credentials, and issue veriﬁable presentations free of charge, companies or other entities that enroll their end u sers must pay fees to [141]: (i) join the network; (ii) register a credential format, i.e., a credential schema; (iii) begin issuing credentials using a registered schema; (iv) register a revocation registry; and (v) revoke certiﬁcates. Four studies argue that usability in SSI is essential [33, 112, 131, 143]. These works declare that users should not need prior knowledge of blockchain technology [33] and other underlying technologies such as cryptographic operations, biometrics, database, and protocols [143]. Moreover, users’ needs and expectations must be met and consistent across all plat forms and services [112]. One possible approach to achieving these goals could be to mimic physical identities and the interactions we have with them, thus presenting the user to familiar workﬂows [143]. Ultimately, if the user does not understand what is going o n and cannot reason abo ut it, then t he individual is not sovereign [131]. Lastly, three works [36, 120, 143] add new ideas and refute concepts introduced by Allen [7]. They all refute existence, which states that individuals cannot exist entirely in digital form and (self-sovereign) identities make some aspects of the user p ublic. Toth and Anderson-Priddy [143] have refuted existence, transparency, and protection, arguing that more discussions are needed on these subjects. Similarly, in [ 36] the autho rs argued that previous d iscussions about identity did not address existence [1, 26] and therefore exchanged existence for no cost and unrestricted, stating that an identity system should not impose an economic burden in addition to having a device and connectivity. Unlike the two studies mentioned above, Schutte [120] discussed Allen’s principles through a less technical and more philosop hical lens. H e argued that an individual, or “self”, is not an indivisible entity, but the product o f constant interactions by various agents, both internally and externally. He then criticized the principles of existence, control, access, and consent because an individual’s identity is not an object but a “heuristic that simpliﬁes information processing and decision making” [12 0], which is by nature imprecise and therefore it cannot fully anchor identity processes. Ultimately, he argued that claims are of t he utmost importance and can be seen as signals published by some actors and perceived by others, who must decide how to prioritize and interpret them. 5.4 RQ-3: What properties or formal definitions have been specified? The ﬁrst two years of surveyed publications consist of conceptual works. The works analyzed from 2 018 onwards started to present mat hematical constructions to describe ideas more accurately. These articles are mapped using our classiﬁcation mechanism and shown in Figure Following our categorization, two publications are in the identity category [ ical formulations to detail the problem and proposed solu tions for private data recovery, e.g. credentials and claims. In [67], a private data backup system is proposed, in which trusted audit services and trusted individuals are selected. The former receives parts of the keys, while the latter must physically meet to receive encrypted shares of the private data to store on devices with shor t-range connectivity (such as infrared or near-ﬁeld communication). Upon l osing the private data, trusted peers meet and conﬁrm the newly generated digital identity of the aﬀected user to trusted audit services, which reveal the key needed by the user to decrypt their private data gathered from trusted peers. From a diﬀerent perspective, [74] uses proxy re-encryption [22]. This technique allows data encrypted with a person’s key to be decrypted using someone else’s key without revealing anyone’s data or key to the proxy. Trusted individuals execute a group key agreement, and then the derived group key is sent to the proxy that contains the encrypted user data. The user’s private data can be retrieved from the proxy if the group recreates its key and uses it to authenticate with the proxy, which then uses the proxy re-encryptio n scheme to have the user’s private data accessible to the group. Claim PresentationAccess Revocation[67, 74] User De-Name System[45][80] Registration[158] ZKPCertifying Identiﬁers[129][117] IssuerProbabilistic Model[54][115] Authorization[79] Trust Policy[63] Three works present reputation models [20, 52, 54], i.e., ways to quantitatively assess whether a credential, claim, or identity is t rustworthy. Gruner et al. [52] built on top of graph theory to create a graph model of trust, having a function that searches in the graph for credentials issued to an identity and d erives a trust factor. Bhattacharya et al. [20] built on top of [52], adding time as a variable in their reputation model. They argued that, in the context of Sovrin, the initial reputation of issuers might come from Sovrin’s onboarding process. In contrast, the authors of [54] used probability theory t o create a probabilistic model of trust. They used probability the ory to decide whether claims about the same information, but from diﬀerent issuers, could be combined to generate tr ust about it. Smith [129] focused on trust based on self-cert ifying identiﬁers. In this work, identiﬁers are anchored to publickey crypt ography and op enly reveal the hash of their next public key in their transactions. This preemptive key rotation produces an auditable chain of key transfers of a digital identiﬁer. A distributed ledger is presented as root-of-trust to store the event history of digital identiﬁers. With a diﬀerent perspect ive, Inoue et al. [63] modeled as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) a trust policy evaluation problem speciﬁcally for the task of updating a person’s information in multiple RPs, each with its trust policy. In this ILP, trust policies are modeled as credibility requirements about incoming c laims, and successfully updating a person’s information in an RP increases credibility. The ILP is then transformed into a graph problem, and a heuristic based on Dijkstra’s algorithm ﬁnds approximate solutions. This article is the only surveyed material wit h a formal description o f the problem attacked. Two works present ideas and mathematical models to implement issuer authorization [79, 115], which allows issuers to establish hierarchies similar to traditional certiﬁcate authorities in PKI. Schanzenbach’s Ph.D. thesis [115] presents a construction using name systems (e.g. Domain Name System (DNS) [99], and GNU Name System (GNS) [152]) that allows an issuer to delegate authorization to issue credentials with speciﬁc attributes to other issuers, which can also delegate to others. With the same goal, but using a diﬀerent construction, the authors of [79] formalized a model that uses the RSA cryptographic accu mulator [25] to allow authorized issuers to issue credentials without revealing their identity. The authors argued that this ﬁlls a gap in the Hyperledger Indy framework [60], where an issuer 𝐴 cannot stop 𝐵 from issuing credentials using 𝐴’s credential format. In addition to being part of the group of works that model issuer authorization, [79] is also present in the group of works that formalize Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) techniques. In this work, ZKP allows an issuer to mathematically prove that it is part of a group of au thorized issuers w ithout revealing a unique identiﬁer. T he other three works in this group use ZKP to do claim presentation (i.e. veriﬁable presentation). Bot h [81] and [117] use a general-purpose ZKP named zero-knowledge Succinct Non-interactive ARguments of Knowledge (zk-SNARK) [21] to allow the subject of the credentials to produce proofs about the data in their credentials. Through zk-SNARK, proofs containing predicates over attributes in credentials are possible, e.g. the credential subject is over 18 years old. In contrast, Abraham et al. [2] built a ZKP proof system using Water’s signature [153] and BLS signature [2 3] that does not allow the execution of predicates over certiﬁcate data. Instead, their scheme allows users to reveal certiﬁcate at tributes without showing the entire certiﬁcate. Three other works also model claim presentation, and additionally, introduce access revocation o f presented claims [80, 116, 158]. In [80] a model is detailed where social media platforms such as Facebook and LinkedIn are used as a means of requesting, generating, and revoking credentials, along with claim presentation and revocation of presented claims. However, predicates over credential attributes are not supported, only attribute disclosure. Diﬀerently, the authors of [158] implemented claims revocation through chameleon hashing [76]. This family of one-way functions uses a trapdoor so that, without access to it, they function like traditional one-way functions. However, having access to the trapdoor, e.g., through a key, one can easily ﬁnd collisions for a given input. [ special feature of the chameleon hash to implement a rewriteable blockchain, that is, a blockchain whose history can be manipulated through the chameleon hash trapdoor. Based on these eﬀorts, the authors of [ blockchain in which users can revoke access to claims published in the ledger through a trapdoo r. Lastly, in [ is argued that static claims that a speciﬁc party has been granted access cannot be revoked becau se it is likely that they have been persisted locally. Their approach to this challenge is to grant and revoke access to up-to-date information through version control and encryption. Keys are provided to RPs as new versions of claims are created, thereby revoking access as needed. Finally, a unit set is composed of [ This formalization includes user registration and user de-registration. 5.5 RQ-4: What practical problems have been introduced and solved? Our keywording process has enabled us to cl assify surveyed works and generate visualizations to answer our research questions. The dat a items on our data extraction form relating to our last research question, namely What practical problems have been introduced and solved?, have been ﬁlled in by most of the mapped works. Consequently, the map for our fourth research question is denser, having a larger number of pu blications when compared to the previous ones. Figure10 shows this map. Fig. 10. Map of publications that introduced and solved novel problems in the SSI ecosystem. In the identity set there are two subsets disjoint to t he credential and t rust sets, namely decentralized identiﬁers and private data recovery. The former holds two standards [109, 154] and one research article [73]. In [109] the Decentralized Identiﬁers (DID) standard is proposed. It introduces a metamodel for creating identiﬁers without centralized hierarchy and controlled by their owners. An instance of this metamodel is a DID method and deﬁnes speciﬁc details such as underlying encryption algorithms and how the identiﬁers in this method are unique. All DIDs are Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URIs) [18] with three parts separated b y a colon: (i) the did scheme identiﬁer; (ii) the DID method identiﬁer; and (iii) the DID method-speciﬁc identiﬁer. For instance, did:key: z6MkpTHR8VNsBxYAAWHut2Geadd9jSwuBV8xRoAnwWsdvktH is a valid DID identiﬁer that uses the DID method named key [134]. In this method, the ﬁrst character of the method-speciﬁc identiﬁer is always z, and the following three characters represent the public-key algorithm used. In this case, the characters 6Mk indicate that Ed25519 [70] was used, and subsequent characters are the multibase [17] encoded public-key. Other DID methods use blockchain and other technologies to persist the user-generated DID and its respective DID document, a JSON-based document with communication endpoints and cryptographic keys to ensure that the holder of a DID is its owner. As pointed out in Section5.2.3, this standard has signiﬁcant importance in the SSI literature, being the second most referenced work in this survey. Although [109] establishes a starting p oint for self-sovereign identiﬁers and the authentication of their owners, this standard does not specify a way for two (or more) DIDs to interact. [154] attacks this problem proposing DIDComm, a two-party protocol to create a communication channel between the holders of two DIDs with pre-deﬁned messages, states, and transitions. It supports the transportation of messages through out-of-band channels such as QRcode and e-mail [155]. According t o Kim et al. [73], the endp oint URLs in DID documents have an anonymity problem. They argued that URLs could leak information, such as the c ountry of origin and other aﬃliations. They proposed two countermeasures: (i) to suppress URLs altogether and use other means of communication; and (ii) to use gateway URLs that only redirect authorized entities to the correct address. With regards to private data recovery, there are three works that present this problem and propose so lutions [67, 74, 128]. Two of them [67, 74] introduce mathematical formalism and therefore were detailed above. The remaining article [128] in this category also concerns human-computer int eraction (HCI). The authors argued that their scheme presents a trade-oﬀ between security, i.e., storing an encrypted form of the private key in lower security environments, and usability, i.e., recovering the original private key without the need for long passphrases or hardware security modules (HSMs). To achieve this trade-oﬀ, the private key is divided using Shamir’s secret sharing technique [126], a secret sharing protocol where the secret is recovered if a minimum number of parts can be retrieved. In this case, the user has to correctl y answer a minimum amount of previously registered questions, where each answer is a part of Shamir’s technique. To increase security, the minimum amount of c orrect answers is increased. Five other articl es also present concerns about HCI in SSI. Two are in the identity category [103, 144], two are in the intersection between identity and credential [88, 127], and one is in the intersection b etween identity and trust [156]. Toth et al. [144] argued that biometrics and other forms of two-factor authentication slightly improved the security of identities. Then, they introduced a software agent to manage user data. It helps users de c ide which identities to create and use and which private information to disclose, thereby improving security through better human-computer interactions. With a diﬀerent focus, the authors of [103] put forward a patent for an authentication method based on a person’s interactions with its personal device. The device monitors application usage patterns, browser history, location history, and other measurements to determine if the person holding the device is the owner. Regards HCI and trust, [ claims is a su bstantial risk for an algorithm to decide on its own. They put forward a proposal where the user has to decide if digital identities can be tr usted or not actively. The user is empowered to make that decision through a graph of previous interactions of t he proponent with other digital identities, which is created from the history stored in a distributed ledger. The last two works in the HCI subset are at the intersection of identity and credentials [88, 127]. The authors of [88] presented an extensive study of SSI usability and found out that t he current interactions of SSI systems require extensive prior knowledge and participant responsibility. The authors used the human data interaction theory [ argues that humans interact with data rather than computers, to investigate the interface layer of SSI. The conclusion points to the need for standardization and design thinking of interfaces and interactions to increase the likelihood of adoption. On the subject of participant responsibility, Shanmugarasa et al. [ ing veriﬁable presentations. For example, non-technically savv y users may accept to provide more information than requesting services need. The proposed solution for this problem is a privacy preference reco mmendation system that uses machine learning algorithms with pre-trained models built from surveyed data on privacy preferences. This system helps the user by advising which attributes are acceptable to be shared. Five works present the problem of access revocation of credentials [ Three of them [80, 116, 1 58] use mathematical formalism, and t herefore have been described above. The remaining two articles [ Concerned about the portability and interoperability of claims, the authors of [ specifying c laims in blockchains. First, they described the claim metadata comp osed of name, timestamp, expiration time, proof format, and proof link. Then the claims l ifecycle is organized in a blockchain format, where there are speciﬁc types of blocks for making new claims, adding more attestation to a claim (i.e., having ot her entities sign a claim), and revoking an attestation or a claim. On the other hand, Abraham et al. [3] attacked the problem of oﬄine veriﬁcation of credential status. Their ap proach is to have the blockchain generate an attestatio n of the validity of requested certiﬁcates with the timestamp. This attestation is then presented when there is no connectivity to the revocation registry, and the relying party decides if it is recent enough to be accepted. Another trend of research in SSI is to provide protocol integration with production-level standards. This was presented as the driving problem of [53, 58, 93], but it was also developed in the aforementioned work of Schanzenbach et al. [116]. Both [53] and [93] aim to integrate SSI with the OpenID Connect protocol [111], an identity layer that provides authentication on top of OAuth 2.0, the de facto industry-standard protocol for authorization [5 7]. In [53], a gateway is built between two SSI solutions [43, 146] and web applications using the OpenID Connect protocol . Users can select claims to compose their identity, which are veriﬁed by the gateway and then transferred to the destination application for authentication using the OpenID Connect protocol. Similarly, [ gateway between Hyperledger Indy [ of Hyperledger Indy (such as Sovrin [ on the user’s smartphone. Application-level authorizatio n is implemented in [ present. Diﬀerently, the authors of [58] implemented author iz ation through OAuth 2.0, which facilitates integration with existing web services. However, unlike [ Connect. By allowing users of SSI solutions to access web applications through the OpenID Connect p rotocol, [ up implementing identity derivation mechanisms, that is, a way to derive an SSI identity from non-SSI systems. This 3, 137] are detailed next. is the main objective of [2] but also achieved by [16]. In [2], a digital identity derivation protocol is proposed, where user data scattered across various IdPs are gathered and transformed into credentials to be imported into an SSI system. It starts by connecting the individual to the IdPs that hold the data, and then the attributes are signed. The attributes in these credentials can be presented as veriﬁable claims through ZKP. Focusing on digital identity authentication, Bathen et al. [16] discussed the possibility of replay attacks using biometric data once an attacker gains access to biometric templates. They argued that the solution t o this problem is user-managed cancelable b iometrics. In this system, a person’s self-image, i.e. a selﬁe, is passed through one-way functions to mask the o riginal data, then the result is stored on a blockchain and managed as a credential. This second authentication factor can be used for a higher level of assurance authentication. Along with [2], two other surveyed articles propose zero-knowledge proof schemes to create provable claims [81, 117], labeled Z KP claims in Figure 10. Tho se three papers introduced mathematical formal ism and were described above. The subject of wallet security drives one patent [55] and one research article [68]. The authors of [55] proposed a hardware-based wallet containing cryptographic keys and credentials. It can be connected to mobile devices when needed and disconnected, and safely stored after usage. On the other hand, in [68] holders do not store their credentials. Instead, credentials are hosted on a storage ser vice and secured by a two-party protocol. Furthermore, holders do not access their data directly. Instead, RP agents request the holder’s agent running on the storage service for the needed information, which then asks the user for authentication and authorization. With this approach, users never receive their credentials, and therefore do not have to worr y about storing them securely. As a two-party encryption protocol encodes the credentials, the stor age service cannot misuse t he credentials. The most inﬂuential work in the credential set, according to our ﬁndings above, is the W3C’s Veriﬁable Credentials standard [132]. Like the DID standard [109], this standard is also a metamodel. It deﬁnes the meta-structure and lifecycle of VCs and VPs. Both VC and VP must have: (i) metadata that describes the data; (ii) the data; and (iii) cryptographic proof of integrity and authenticity. When some model instantiates this metamodel, it needs to specify the adopted syntax, cryptographic algorithms, and proof format to construct VCs and VPs. For instance, in Hyperledger Indy [60], a VC’s metadata is stored in a distributed ledger, while the data and proof are stored in a JSON ﬁle. There are two research materials [82, 92] in the credential set that are neither intersecting with identity nor trust. The authors of [92] introduced the problem of metadata search in Hyperledger Indy [60]. The aut ho rs argued that adding new types of credentials comes at a monetary cost, and therefore it is worthwhile to reuse existing formats. They used Apache Solr [10] to build a search application that allows users to ﬁnd existing credential metadata stored on the ledger. Attacking a diﬀerent challenge, Lim et al. [82] propo sed a VC delegation mechanism that req uires the VC subject to conﬁrm or deny its usage by the delegatee. They argued that a VP constructed by d elegatees is limited because they only have the VC in an encrypted format. H ence, any VP presented by a delegatee incurs in communication with the VC subject to request authorization and complement the VP with the required data. Three articles discuss issues related t o SSI Design [14, 85, 87], where [85, 87] are the only works at the intersection of the three major categories of our map. In [87] design patterns are presented to facilitate the development of new blockchain-based SSI applications. The lifecycle of key management, identity management, and credential management are presented. Then twelve patterns are proposed within these three groups, fo llowing the format of [94], which consists of a pattern name, summary, the context of use, a problem statement, a discussion, the solution, and its consequences. Diﬀerently, the authors of [85] argued that IDMs could be reduced to two mappings: (i) digital identiﬁer and its owner; and (ii) digital identiﬁer and its credentials. In addition, the following operations are required for bot h mappings: create, read, update, delete and verify. The way they are built depends on the desired tru st model for t he system. If SSI is the goal, all of them should be done without relying on any authority. Finally, Barclay et al. [ posed a modeling str ategy in which SSI entities and their credentials can be speciﬁed and understood by non-technical stakeholders. They used iStar 2.0 [ and the interdependence of their goals, to represent users in the issue of credentials and presentation of claims in an SSI system. One of the design patterns speciﬁed in [ 130]. In [84], a self-signed root certiﬁcate acts as a cert iﬁcate authority (CA) that generates short -lived intermediate certiﬁcates for the users. The authors argued that since certiﬁcates are rotated at a predetermined frequency, the key recovery problem ceases to exist as long as the root certiﬁcate and its private key are not lost or compromised. In contrast, Soltani et al. [ wallet application where the users pre-picks their trusted peers and which keys will be recoverable. Key pieces are distributed to pre-selected users in a secret sharing protocol base d on [ minimum number of parts can be retrieved from peers. Three research papers attack the problem of trust policy evaluation [ and relationships so that a machine can automaticall y evaluate them. This challenge is not the main focus of [ explained above. Nonetheless, an ILP model and a graph-based heuristic are introduced. The authors of [ 77] proposed that entities deﬁne trust policies through lists of au thorities they trust. These trusted entities, in turn, also publish which entities they recognize as trustworthy. For instance, one could trust a bank federation that periodically reports which banks it recognizes as credible. Thus, when receiving the VP of a person stating that she has an account on an unrecognized bank, a query to the bank federation’s list of trusted banks is enough to decide if the VP can be trusted or not. In contrast, in [ worrying about low-level aspects, was adapt ed to work in SSI. The TPL has been extended with SSI-related concepts such as DID and VC, allowing for the spe ciﬁcation of rules to check VPs. The t wo works [ detailed above. Nevertheless, [ their approach to trust in Hyperledger Indy. More speciﬁcally, [ types stored in the Indy blockchain and then discussed the steps a veriﬁer can take to gain conﬁdence when receiving a presentation. For instance, they argued that if diﬀerent entities issue credentials of a given format (credential schema), this provides mo re assurance than a schema that a single issuer only endorses. Lastly, [ the unit set of trust based on s elf-certifying identiﬁers [ discussed earlier. Thus, we categorized and detailed all surveyed works that advance the state of the art of SSI. In the next section, we proceed to discuss open challenges. 6 OPEN CHALLENGES The surveyed materials present initial developments on SSI. New publications will continue to advance the conceptual debate about what it means for an identity to be self-sovereign and introduce new and unforeseen challenges in the SSI ecosystem. Based on the evidence gathered to answer our research questions, we identify challenges that should be attacked by future work. They are detailed below with recommendations. 79, 115] map ped relating to the issuer authorization introduced mathematical for mal ism and were 20, 52, 5 4] form the set of works that deal with reputation model in SSI. This set of articles, along with A deﬁnition of SSI that researchers and practit io ners accept. In this review, we have gathered evidence (see Section5.3) that most of the articles reviewed on SSI fundamentals agree with the principles establishe d by Allen [7], also adding new ones. Promoting a comprehensive review and discussion is important to produce a new set of rules to deﬁne SSI. In addition, mathematical formalism can b e used to establish precise boundaries. Having an accurate deﬁnition of SSI w ill beneﬁt future eﬀorts and, ultimately, u sers who will transition between SSI systems knowing they share the same fundamentals. Basic research. Most of the materials surveyed provide a mathematical model tailored to the proposed algor ithm. Only one of the articles surveyed presents a comprehensive mathematical for mulation of SSI [45], but it does not c over the inherently decentralized trust aspects of SSI. In addition, [87] makes realistic considerations and provides design patterns for many facets of SSI, including trust. These articles [45, 87] are good starting points. However, more basic research is needed to promote a debate about ideas on how to jointly represent identities, credentials, claims, and tru st, which is important for future pragmatic research. By answeringRQ-2 and RQ-3 (see Sections 5.3 and 5.4), we prod uce a st arting p oint for future basic research. Complex att r ibute sharing. Revised publications: (i) use ZKP to create Boolean predicates about attributes [2, 81, 117]; (ii) create versions of the data, encrypting and distributing keys to the most recent revision [116]; or (iii) use a chameleon hash to implement redactable bl ockchains [158]. However, these methods are unsuitable when more complex attributes need to be shared and may not change for several years. For instance, the shipping address for online purchase or a phone number. Therefore, more research on VP is required to ensure a wide variety of use cases coverage. Sound trus t models. Trust p lays an essential role in SSI and will be of paramount importance for the adopt io n of SSI solutions. If trust models are not tested comprehensively, they will become attractive targets for hackers. This challenge is exacerbated by the current standardization eﬀort [133] that speciﬁes a Boolean trust model in which a veriﬁer trusts the issuer or not, which does not cover fuzzy scenarios of the real world. For example, an entity may present multiple claims about the same attribute where some issuers are trusted, and o thers are not. Can this claim be trusted? Quantiﬁable trust/reputation models are needed, and only three articles surveyed attack this problem [20, 52, 54]. Furthermore, trust models need solid security, so formal veriﬁcation techniques [95] must b e employed t o provide an adequate level of assurance. Blockchainless SSI. On blockchain-based SSI systems, trust in an IdP has not been completely removed but instead replaced by a decentralized entity, which the user needs to trust to embrace SSI. The user should not have to trust and depend on a b lockchain consortium t o participate in an SSI ecosystem. However, most publications work with the ﬂawed assumption that blockchain is a fundamental part of SSI. The user should not nee d to trust anyone to be selfsovereign. To facilitate the migra tion from other paradigms. In federated and user-centric models, the administration’s burden falls almost entirely in the IdP. Users usually need to just worry about password management. With SSI, u sers are also overloaded with management tasks suc h as backing up their keys, identities, and credentials and creating and presenting claims. We have mapped publications that propose techniques to derive (self-sovereign) identities from federated and user-centric identities [2, 16], and others that worry with the backup and recovery of keys [84, 130] and private data [67, 74]. Therefore, academia is p icking up momentum on this migration challenge. Usability. It is important to research applications’ interfaces and the interactions between peo ple through them. Ultimately, individuals will use SSI systems. Meaningful interaction must occur between people and applications and, more importantly, between individuals in an SSI ecosystem. Otherwise, users are unlikely to leave the comfort of their current federated/user-centric identities. A common trend in usability research is to imitat e physical wallets [ thus presenting the user with everyday interactions. Innovative solut io ns are necessary and can be decisive for the widespread adoption and success of SSI. 7 FINAL REMARKS SSI is a new identity management paradigm that increases people’s agency in the digital world. Boosted by the pop ularity of blockchain, SSI systems attracted attention from academia and industry. Existing surveys have presented biased results towards blockchain and missed the bigger picture. In this article, we systematically surveyed both peer-reviewed literature and non-peer-reviewed literature that: (i) expanded the conceptual discussion on what SSI is; (ii) introduced mathematical formulation to precisely deﬁne o ne or more SSI-related problems; or (iii) introduced a novel pragmatical problem related to the SSI ecosystem and presented a solution to it. After keywording the selected works, three SSI-speciﬁc maps were created and used to classify the surveyed work. These maps allow the reader to understand the main contributions of the reviewed works and give a broad understanding of the current position of research in SSI. In addition, our maps serve as a basis for researchers and entrepreneurs who intend to expand SSI conceptually or develop new SSI systems. Finally, we presented open challenges, thus leading to future research and opportunities directions in the area. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by the Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Rio Grande do Sul (IFRS).