Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA Abstract—This paper discusses cellular network security for unmanned aircraft systems (UASs) and provides insights i nto the ongoing Th ird Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) standardization efforts with respect to authentication and authorization, location information privacy, and command and control signaling. We introduce the 3GPP reference architecture for network connected UAS and the new network functions as part of the 5G core network, discuss introduce the th ree security contexts, potential threats, and the 3GPP procedures. The paper identiﬁes research opportunities for UAS communi cations security and recommends critical security features and processes to be considered for standardization. Index Terms—3GPP, 5G, cellular communications, security, UAV, UAS, U TM. The unmanned airc raft system (UAS) technology development and market pe netration has led to research and development on cellular connected unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). UAVs are considered as potential cellular network users for receiving comma nd and co ntrol (C2) and other services. They may also provide network support to extend coverage, increase capacity, or enhanced security in 4G, 5G, and future 6G networks [1]. Different standards groups, including The IEEE, The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), and The Th ird Generation Partnership Project (3 GPP) , have initiated working groups (WGs) to e nable th e integration of UAVs into cellular network s. An recent IEE E WG focuses on developing the architecture and protocols for facilitating self-organizing, spectrum-a gile commu nications for UAVs to enhance terrestrial connectivity [2]. An IT U study group standardizes a functional architecture of IMT-2020 networks where both the UAV and its contr oller (UAV-C), which com prise a UAS, are considered user equipment (UEs) [3]. Th e 3GPP has established WGs to identify a reference architecture and the requirements/assumptions for remote identiﬁcatio n (RID) and tracking (RID&T) of UAVs and C2 signaling, among others. The app lication layer a rchitecture is another 3GPP study item to support efﬁcient UAS deploym ent and service provisioning. The 3GPP has identiﬁed a number of connectivity and interference issues for cellular connected UAVs and has recommended solutions in its technical reports and standards for 4G and 5G [4]. Security is vital for efﬁcient cellular connected UAV deployments. This includes the conﬁdentiality protection of identiﬁers (IDs), spooﬁng immunity, and various levels for the integrity and privacy preservation of UAS control and data links [5]. The threat m odel has shifted since sophisticated software rad io hardware and software became widely available. Targeted wireless attacks to cellular networks, such as eavesdropping, jamm ing, and spo oﬁng of control and data channels, can be implemented with open-so urce software investments [6], [7]. The 3GPP has therefore initiated a study on security aspects of network connected UAVs to identify key issues and solutions [8]. Early research has studied the privacy and conﬁdentiality concerns of network connected UASs. Alladi et al. [9] propose a physically unclonable function scheme for the lightweight mutual authentication b etween UAVs and the 5G base station (BS) with unique and secure session keys for each session. Bansal et al. [10] develop a one-to-on e (UAV-to-BS) scalable authenticatio n protocol using K-means c lustering. Li et al. [11] present an elliptic curve cryptography authentication scheme to preserve the ID and authenticate the UAV and the ground BS with low computationa l cost. This paper discusses cellu lar network security for UASs in the b roader sense and provides insights into the ongoing 3GPP standardization efforts with respect to authentication and authorization (A&A) , locatio n inf ormation privacy, and C2 signaling. T he objective is to comprehend the reasons behind the 3GPP procedu res for securing the UAV and UAVC network connections and services. We therefore explore the critical security contexts and potential threats before outlining the 3GPP security procedures and identifying the rema ining research and standardization opportunities. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the 3 G PP reference architecture for network connected UASs and the new 5G network functio ns (NFs). We present the security context and identify the main thre ats and the corresponding solutions developed by The 3GPP in Sections III a nd IV. Section V identiﬁes the remaining challenges and opportunities for research, development, and standardization. Section VI provides th e concluding remarks. This section introduces the reference architecture of the 3GPP standardization body for supporting UA S applications and use cases. The 3GPP standardization considers a UAS as a UAV and UAV-C pair, where each will be authorized as an individual UE in the 3G PP network. The 3GPP work items aim to provide a network architecture that enables c ontrol plane (CP) Fig. 1: The 3GPP reference arch itec ture for cellular network connected UAS (PLMN–public land m obile network; TPAE–third party authorized entity; UTM–UAS trafﬁc management). and user plane (UP) communications services for UASs and provide wireless connectivity between the UAS and non-3 G PP aviation entities, such as the UAS Service Supplier (USS) and the UAS Trafﬁc Management (UTM) for beyond v isu al lin e of sighs (BVLOS) operatio ns. The USS and UTM entities are responsible for p roviding various functions to ensure the safety and security of the UAS operations. These functions include C2 service s, services to civil aviation authority (CAA), telematics, UAS-generated data, RID, authorization, enforc ement, a nd regulation of UAS operation. The UTM/USS can be integrated in the 3GPP framework as an application functio n (AF), operating as a CP network function, or an application server in the data network. For the support and assistance of UAS operations, The 3GPP is working on an architectu re that is applicable to the evolved packet system and the 5th generation system. The proposed architecture should b e able to associate and identify the UAV-C, whether or not it uses the 3GPP network to connect to the UAV. The 3GPP architecture for UASs provisions interworking between the UAV and UAV-C even if both nodes are served by two different public la nd mobile networks (PLMNs). Figure 1 illustrates the reference architectur e for cellular connected UASs as proposed by the 3GPP standardization group in the Technical Repor t (TR) 23. 754 [12]. It assum es that there are other external entities that are not included a s UTM functionalities and tha t can monitor UAVs, track UAV data, and control UAVs. Th ese entities are deﬁned under the umbrella of the third party authorized entity (TPAE). The TPAE can be an application server in the data network from the perspective of the 3GPP network. The control of a UAV for BVLOS operations can be performed either by the UAV-C or by the TPAE, where the C2 packets may be exchanged between the UAV and the UAV-C, UTM, or TPAE. The network interfaces are also illustrated in Fig. 1 and introduced in continuation. U1: The interface between the UAV and UAV-C with the 3GPP network for facilitating authorization, authentication, identiﬁcation, and tracking of the UAV and UAV-C, U2: The interface between the 3GPP network and the T PAE for facilitating the RID&T of the UAV, U3: The interface responsib le for transporting C2 packets between the UAV-C and the UAV via in tra or inter-PLMN UP connectivity, U4: The interface between the UAV node and the TPAE through the 3GPP network for C2 signaling and RID&T of th e UAV, U5: The interface for transporting C2 packets between the UAV and the UAV-C, th e latter being connected to a non3GPP network via the Internet, U6: The interface between the 3GPP network and an external USS/UTM entity for enabling identiﬁcation , authorization, a nd trac king of the UAV, U7: The interface between the UAV and other entities outside the scope of The 3GPP for broadcasting the RID, U8: The in terface between the UAV and th e UAV-C for transporting C2 data over a network that is beyond the scope of The 3GPP, U9: The direc t inte rface between different components of the UAS (UAV, UAV-C) and the USS/UTM for various operational functions such as networked RID, C2, UAV authenticatio n, authorization , and tracking, and U2U: The interface between two UAVs to support the broadcast of th e RID. For the comple te 3GPP network support of UAS applications, enhancements to the 5G core network (5GC) are necessary. These come in the shape of AFs and The 3GPP deﬁnes three of them speciﬁcally for suppo rting UAS opera tions. These are h ighlighted in Fig. 2 and introduced in continuation. implemented to serve as a single interface to the USS/UTM. Principally, the UFES p erforms the USS/UTM discovery mechanisms and the selection p rocedures without requiring other 3GPP n etwork nodes. The USS/UTM selection by the UFES is based on the CAA-Level UAV ID, which provides RID&T inform ation to the TPAE/USS/UTM that may be monitoring a UAV. T he UFES supports delive ry of the UAV external ID as the 3GPP UAV ID to the USS/UTM, and can retrieve releva nt subscription information from the uniﬁed data management (UDM) and/or receive policy control information from the policy control function (PCF). The UFES determines a protocol data unit (PDU) session for the UAV operation through the session management function (SMF) to transmit the o peration updates from the USS containing the updated authorized UAV and UAV-C pairing in formation. AF that assists with the A&A of UAS node s over the UP. A UAV originating A& A request is transferred to the UAAF throu gh the access and mobility management function (AMF). It includes the UAV ID, the UAV application ID, and the served UTM/USS ID. The UAAF validates that the UAV has a valid subscription and includes relevant subscription and applica tion information from the PCF to be sent to the UTM/USS via the UFES. the PLMN serving the UAV/UAV-C. I t is able to deliver the UAV/UAV-C lo c ation re ports or deferred reports upon request from the UTM/USS. The UCF invokes the g ateway mobile location centre (GMLC) procedures for obtaining the location of the UAV or the UAV-C up on receiving a request from the UTM/USS via the UFES, while trigge ring the AMF for r egistration infor mation related to the served node. The UCF is also resp onsible for matching the 3GPP UAV ID provided by the UTM/USS with the 3GPP UE ID and transferring the CAA-level UAV ID to the UTM/USS, where both I D s are needed for successfu l authentication and location pro cedures. The UCF determines the needed 5GC NF to be invoked when the interworking between th e 5GC and the UTM/USS is needed. Security context: The 3GPP entities such as the gNodeB and the AMF must be able to identify the UAV and UAVC a nd distinguish its access from other UEs. Based on the architectura l r equirements [12], there are two types of IDs deﬁned for a particular UAV node. The designated CAA level UAV ID, which is assigned by the USS/UTM, is employed for RID&T. T he 3GPP UAV ID is used for rec ognizing the UAV; it provides the necessary c redentials for the UAV to become an authorized UE and gain access to 3GPP serv ic es. The core network is responsible for matching the CAA-level UAV ID to the 3GPP UAV ID. An additional factor that must be ta ken into consideration to preserve a fully authenticated and author ized process for the USS system is th e pa iring between UAV and UAV-C that takes place at the USS/UTM. The result of this pairing process must be communicated to the 3GPP network. UAS authentication and authorization is the prerequisite to enable overruling the UAV-C in case of suspicious access after tracking the UAV d ata by the TPAE that can take over the control of the UAV. Consequently, the connection request must be authenticated and authorized by the 3GPP network differently from a normal UAV-C, UAV, or UE. The 3GPP network must follow certain po licie s regardin g the unsuccessful authenticatio n and author iz ation whe re the UAAF may inform the SMF to prevent the registration and/or the cancellation of illegitimate PDU sessions by an unapproved UAV or UAV-C. Potential threats: A weak UAS authentication process can gra nt access to an untrusted UAV or UAV-C to rec eive UAS services via the 3GPP ne twork. This ca n cause leakage of critical data such as UAS system capabilities, location, and encryption keys. U nauthoriz e d UAVs may attempt to imitate the behavior of legitimate UAVs to launch man-inthe-middle or replay attacks [1 3]. An unauthorized node that is able to obtain the credentials of authorized nodes could then inject false data. In a surveillance scenario, for example, an unauthorized UAV may deliberately alter and provide false data (e.g. alter e d pictures or video streams). A fake USS/UTM may inject messages to the UAS nodes that affect UAV ﬂight operations with the possibility of UAV hijacking. A malicious radio node may continuously jam the communications channels to cause bandwidth saturation, hinder the A&A process of legitimate UAS nodes requesting network access, or cause denial of serv ic e of already authenticated nodes. B. Location Information Veracity and Location Tracking Authorization Security context: The UAV is required to notify the USS/UTM en tities of its location using one of several forms of location information, including the absolute position, e.g., global navigation satellite system (GNSS) coordinates, and the relative position, such as cell ID or tracking a rea based coordinates. The reported loca tion informa tion may be used by the USS/UTM to deﬁne the optimal set of actions need ed to ensure safe aerial operations. The reporting of lo cation information can be veriﬁed using UAS application layer mechanisms such as the networked RID. In addition, it is preferable to advocate the position reporting fo r both UAV/UAV-C and USS/UTM via network assisted positioning mec hanisms offered by the 3 G PP network. The 3GPP network forwards the estimated location informa tion to the USS/UTM as supplementary data when it is requested. There are already various location services tha t can be used by the UAV or UAV-C in the evolved terrestrial radio access network or next g eneration RAN (NG-RAN). These include the network- assisted GNSS, downlink positioning, enhanced cell ID, terrestrial beacon system, reference sign al time difference, and observed time difference of arrival. Potential threats: The loc ation information can be compromised through a spooﬁng attack to create false loca tion reports and force the USS/UTM to mislead the air space management decisions into inaccurate and dangerou s directions. The falsiﬁed locatio n data created by a spoofer can lead to costly cyberphy sical or kinetic attacks on the UAS and, for example, steer the UAV to ﬂy over unauthorize d or prohibited airspace, deceive the maneuver strategy to create air conﬂicts, or confu se authorities or pilots about the location of UAVs. The location spooﬁng attacks can be carried out by external means through a fake GNSS or cell ID transmitter [14]. Security context: The C2 signaling is used to control the UAV operations through the controller, which can be the UAV-C, TPAE, or USS/UTM. The C2 links communications can be provided through the 3GPP network via one of these interfaces—U3, U4 , or U9 (Fig. 1)—as a function of the n ode that control the UAV. The C2 com munication s between the UAV and UAV-C can be classiﬁed into three modes: direct, network assisted, and UT M navigated [4]. It is critical to preserve reliable and available C2 comm unications in spite of radio condition variations, different tr a fﬁc situations, and unpredictable events. This must be addressed by means of selecting or switching to the appropriate C2 communications mode. For examp le , when a UAV approaches the BVLOS region from the controller and th e direct communications link between th e UAV and its controller bec omes unstable, it is preferable to switch from direct to network assisted C2 . Potential threats: The ability to eavesdrop, monitor, o r otherwise attack C2 communications between the UAS peers is a security risk that must be supp ressed to ensure the safety and integrity of aerial operations. Uncertainty in the security measures for C2 links makes the system vulnerable to control deﬁciencies that can lead to failures of operation or UAVs being hijacked. Smart a ttac kers can target and take advantage of the switching process be twe en the C2 modes and exploit the security vulner abilities of the least protected mode. A combined eavesd ropping and jamming attack can be conducted over the C2 links, whe re the jammer downgrades the Qo S and initiates the process of switching from one C2 mode to another. The eavesdropper may then intercept the control messages and use this information to further attac k the system. This section in troduces the 3GPP approaches that were designed to prevent many of the previously described security threats. Speciﬁcally, we discuss the 3GPP proc e dures to secure access, location information, and C2 signaling. Figure 3 presents the workﬂow suggested by The 3GPP for the UAS A&A. It involves the UAAF, which is a new AF that is used to validate the subscription information of the UAV and UAV-C and assist with the A&A process of the USS/UTM. The procedures is described in continuation: 1) The primary A&A is performed between the UAV/UAV- the PLMN UE ID (i.e., the subscription per manent ID) and the corresponding credentials. 2) A PDU session is established between the UAV/UAV- C a nd the UAAF f or enabling the UAS speciﬁc A&A message exchanges with a default policy that prevents any trafﬁc f rom the UAV/UAV-C except the trafﬁc destined for the UAAF. 3) The UAV/UAV-C initiates the A&A request with the UAAF as UP data p roviding the UAV/UAV-C identity, USS/UTM identity if already known, and application level information. 4) The UAAF request the relevant subscription information of the UAV/UAV-C node that initiated the A&A process from the PCF with the assistance from the binding support function (BSF), which binds th e UAV/UAV-C application function r equest to the PCF. 5) Af ter receiving the subscription information of the UAV/UAV-C from the PCF, the UAAF checks its validity for aerial subscription and , if the check is successful, the UAAF determin es the USS/UTM serving the UAV/UAVC b a sed on the provided information in Step 3 a nd th e list stored in the UAAF with valid USS/UTM identities. The 3GPP UAV ID that is obtained from the BSF is then added to the CAA-Level UAV-ID and the application level information and forwarded to the USS/UTM. This completes the A&A process. The UFES facilitates the communications between the UAAF and the USS/UTM. 6) If the information sent to the USS/UTM in the previous step is not sufﬁcient for A&A, the UAAF relays the needed messages between the UAV/UAV-C and USS/UTM through the UFES to the UAV applicatio n and USS/UTM. 7) The A&A r esult becomes transparent and is provided to the UAAF. If the authentica tion is succ essful, the USS/UTM may provide application speciﬁc information to be used for secure communications. If the authentication is unsuccessful, the USS/UTM may infor m the UAAF ab out the possible measures to take, e. g. to terminate the PDU session established in Step 2. 8) The UAA F relays the result to the UAV/UAV-C through the 5GC. 9) If the result of Step 6 is successful, th e UAAF info rms the SMF to modify the PDU session estab lished in Step 2 with the authenticated iden tities of the UAV/UAV-C such that the UAV/UAV-C can communica te with the USS/UTM, that is, beyond the limitatio ns of the prior PDU session mentioned in Step 2. B. Location Information Veracity and Location Tracking Authorization Figure 4 presents the 3GPP workﬂow for the secure exchange of location information. This workﬂow involves the UCF which is resp onsible for the location veriﬁcation and for tracing the information o f the UAV and UAV-C to provide trustful location reporting to the USS/UTM. The workﬂow is described below: 1) The process starts with the primary A&A process of the UAS node as a UE in the 5G network followed by the A&A with the USS/UTM to validate the aerial subscription as described in the pr evious subsection and illustrated in Fig. 3. 2) The 5G system will establish the PDU session for location informa tion and tracking data exchange and validation between the UAV/UAV-C and the USS/UTM. 3) The UAS node sen ds the ﬂight operation permission request a s UP data to the UTM. This request may include the UAV identity, its curre nt location, planned trajectory, and so forth. 4) The USS/UTM initiates the location request and veriﬁcation pr ocedures by communicating with the UCF through the UFES. The location information req uest includes the CAA-leve l UAV ID. 5) Af ter receiving the request, the UCF a ctivates the location services AFs of the 5GC through the GMLC to trigger the location veriﬁcation procedures as requested by the USS/UTM in the previous step and to obtain the location informa tion of the UAV and the corresponding UAV-C by f ollowing the location procedures deﬁned in 3GPP TS 23.273. 6) The GMLC then invokes a service operation request in the UD M for the target node to obtain the privacy settings. The UDM retu rns the network address of the serving AMF. 7) The GMLC communicates with the locatio n management function (LMF) to select the network assisted positionin g method which re lies on the location measurement from the NG-RAN nodes, i.e. NG-BSs. The LMF invokes the service operation towards the A MF to request the transfer of a network p ositioning me ssage to a N G -BS. The target NG-BS obtains and returns the position related informa tion. Then the LMF c alculates the location result and responds to the GMLC. 8) The obtained location measurement is transferred fro m the GMLC to the UCF. 9) The UCF ﬁnally forwards the location measurement obtained in Step 7 to the USS/UTM through the UFES. This information can be used to verify the location or ﬂight behavior that the UAV reported. Figure 5 illustrates the 3GPP workﬂow for secu re C2 communications link establishmen t between the UAV and the its con troller, which can be the UAV-C or the USS/UTM. This procedure is an application programming interface (API)based solution that facilitates a secondary authentication with the USS/UTM for the PDU sessions via the 5G da ta network authenticatio n, authorization a nd accounting server. The following steps are performed: 1) The p rimary authentication pr ocedure is performed between the UAV an d the 5G network and between the UAV-C and the 5G network for registering with the network as regular UEs. 2) A request message is sent from the UAV to the AMF for establishing the PDU session with the USS/UTM . This message in cludes the CAA-level UAV ID and data network name/single-network slice selection assistance informa tion (DNN/S-NSSAI). The AMF uses the subscription information of the UAV and the DNN/S-NSSAI to determine the appropriate SMF. 3) The SMF performs a check on the applicability of the requesting UAV to p erform the secondary authentication based on the supplied subscription informatio n and the local policies. 4) The SMF triggers the USS/UTM to initiate the APIbased au thentication process through a proxy A&A function implemented by the UAAF AF in the 5GC. The USS/UTM address can be resolved by the SMF with the obtained CAA-level UAV ID. Next, the proxy A&A initiates communications with the USS/UTM th rough the UFES for performing the secondary authentication and sends the 3GPP UAV ID to the USS/UTM. If the process succeeds, the USS/UTM sends back a new assigne d CAA-leve l UAV ID and authorization token and/or key material to the proxy A&A. These new credentials are provided by the proxy A&A to the SMF. 5) The SMF sends the PDU establishment session accept message to the UAV with the new cre dentials. 6) An additional PDU session establishment request is initiated by the UAV by sending the request to the SMF. The new PDU session will be enabled by providing the Fig. 5 : The 3GPP workﬂow to authenticate and authorize C2 communica tions between UAV and UAV-C over the 5G network. new CAA-level UAV ID obtained from the secondary authenticatio n procedure and the UAV-C iden tity. The PDU session includes a pairing authorization request with the UAV-C to the USS/UTM. The USS/UTM in forms the SMF with the authorized Internet protocol address of the UAV-C that has been obtained by the pairing authorization process to reconﬁgure the PDU session accordin gly. 7) The UAS communications is c onﬁrmed by sending the PDU establishment accept message to the UAV, which will apply the new c redentials and security parameters for future communications. 8) The secure application layer communication is established between the UAV and the USS/UTM for C2 communications while using the new security parameters (authorization token and/or key material). 9) The UAV initiates secure C2 communications with the peer UAV-C. We have reviewed the standar dization e fforts for facilitating secure cellular connected UAS contexts. Various challenges re main that we identify in continuation a nd that we recommend to be considered as research and standardization work items. between th e UAV and the UAV-C or among 3GPP entities for bo th payload data and C2 pa ckets, make them vulnerable to eavesdropping and adversarial attacks. Encryption of transmitted signals among UAS entities has not been standardized yet within the scope of The 3GPP, but th ere are efforts that address this problem as part of open source an d commercia l software projects for UAVs. For example, the Paparazzi and DJI o pen source UAV projects have m a naged to implement encrypte d protocols using Chacha20 with Poly1305 and 256-bit keys with the advanced encryption standards, respectively [15]. It is critical to standardize and enforce encryption for all communications, including UAS originatin g or ter minating data to prevent eavesdropping , location tracking, data breaches, and oth er attacks to privacy and security in tegrity. solutions target th e UAS node s. The 3GPP standards do not provide details on the USS/UTM authentication. The USS/UTM are the main components within the UAS framework where mo st of the a uthentication, authorization, and other related information about th e UAV and UAV-C are stored and processed. T he 3GPP assumes that the USS/UTM is a trusted node prior to the network authentication of the UAS nodes. Such a ssumption may be exploited by an adversary to perform a variety of attacks, such as USS/UTM spooﬁng and requesting network services for unauthorized UAS missions. It is important to perform an authentication check for the USS/UTM with in The 3GPP to conﬁrm its identity and p arameters. dures to update the A&A parameters or processes; however, it does not deﬁn e a speciﬁc lifetime and when a revocation shall be triggered. I t is triggered only wh en a node requests it. Attackers can take the advantage of potentially lo ng-lived authenticatio n para meters and use them to provide access to malicious nodes and perform ad versary attack or ﬂooding attacks to degrade the perfor mance of the system. The A&A revoca tion process should therefor e be regularly triggered to maintain an up-to-date status of the active UAS nodes and missions. should investigate the use of blockchain and distributed ledger tec hnologie s to support the registration of UAS nodes with desirable characteristics such as non-r epudiation and tuna ble tradeoffs be tween operator privacy and public transparency. The blockchain can supplement ﬂight data recording to ensure that the data exchange over the cellular network is secure, tamper proof, and tra c eable for the entire UAS mission without human intervention. UAVs, UAV-Cs, and the USS/UTM need to be connected reliably and securely. In order to enable ﬂexible and safe operations of UAVs, the ce llular communications network is being considered to carry UAS data and c ontrol signals and the correspo nding interfaces and protocols are being standardized for e merging 5G networks. This paper has pre sented the 3GPP architecture for UASs connected to the 5G network and has discussed the critical security threats, the 3GPP proced ures, and the remaining research and standardization opportunities related to A&A, location information privacy, and C2 sign a ling. Research ne eds to feed th e standardization process of this rapidly evolving technology. Experime ntal research can further highlight the importanc e of rigo rously specifying the security framework procedures, parameters, and conﬁgurations in the standards and ensuring that they are fully implemented and tested. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation und er grant number CNS-1939334.