Abstract consequences. Complex mechanobiological factors preclude in vivo testing to assess the rupture risk of an aneurysm, and size based criteria are often used in clinical practice to guide surgical interventions. It is often found that tortuous and buckled aneurysms can exceed in size recommended for surgical intervention, and yet do not rupture. This study addresses why buckled aneurysms exhibit this intriguing behaviour by combining in vitro inﬂation experiments on hyperelastic tubes with ﬁnite element calculations. Using a biologically relevant material model for an arterial wall, we show that buckled aneurysms can grow in size without rupturing under favourable arterial pre-tensions. Stretch reversal phenomenon exhibited by arteries governs whether buckling or bulging occurs ﬁrst. Exponential stiﬀening favours the axial propagation of an aneurysm instead of radial growth in size. The choice of failure criteria based on Ogden’s strain energy function, Gent’s ﬁrst stretch invariant, and Cauchy stress are discussed. Failure maps incorporating post bifurcation (bulging and buckling) response are constructed to delineate the regimes of growth, buckling and rupture of an aneurysm. Keywords: Aneurysm, Buckling, Rupture, Finite Element Analysis Aneurysms are localized bulges of arteries, and they can rupture with fatal 1. Introduction monly observed in the abdominal and the thoracic regions of aorta, due to local degradation in mechanical properties of an artery (Sakalihasan et al., 2018). Biomechanics of aneurysms has been reviewed in (Vorp, 2007; Sakalihasan et al., 2018), arterial wall modelling in (Holzapfel and Ogden, 2010; Humphrey, 2013; Fung, 2013). An increasing incidence rate of aneurysms, ranging from 5.6 to 10.6 per 100,000 persons/year, has been observed in the past decade in developed countries (Acosta et al., 2006). Mortality rate for a ruptured aortic aneurysm can be up to 90%, especially when it occurs outside of a hospital (Sampson et al., 2014). Hence, estimating the rupture risk for AAAs is critical after an aneurysm is detected. Clinical guidelines rely on the maximum diameter of an aneurysm to estimate the rupture risk (Muluk et al., 2017; Lazaris, 2019). However, some AAAs are found unruptured despite their maximum size exceeding the minimum recommended size (5.5 cm) for surgical interventions (Lazaris, 2019; Fillinger et al., 2004). Tortuous and buckled AAAs whose size far exceed the guidelines have been observed without rupture (Fillinger et al., 2004; Hejazi et al., 2021; Boyd et al., 2016; Ducas et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2021). Arterial stability with aneurysm (Lee et al., 2014) and buckling without aneurysms (Liu et al., 2019) has also been studied, among others. However, the rupture of buckled aneurysms remains to be addressed. been tested through controlled in vitro experiments on hyperelastic tubes and numerical modelling (Hejazi et al., 2021) by treating the walls as isotropic and hyperelastic membranes. Pre-tension has been identiﬁed as the key factor that governs whether buckling occurs or not. It has been reported that, under low pre-tensions (arterial pre-stress) an aneurysm buckles and grows in size without rupture. Buckling of an aneurysm is shown to arise from the compressive stresses developed outside the bulged region which overcome the arterial pretension. Hyperelastic models may be justiﬁed on the basis of the degradation of An aneurysm is a balloon-like bulge within the wall of a blood vessel, com- Recently, the hypothesis that buckling oﬀers a fail safe mode for AAAs has elastic ﬁbres due to aneurysm’s pathogenesis at incipient rupture (Niestrawska et al., 2019). Bulge formation and other bifurcation phenomena in hyperelastic cylindrical tubes have been studied extensively using approximate membrane theories for thin walled tubes (Haughton and Ogden, 1979b,a; Fu et al., 2012), diﬀuse interface models (Lestringant and Audoly, 2018, 2020), and for thick walled cylindrical tubes (Fu et al., 2016; Wang and Fu, 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020). Hyperelastic models have also been used in ﬁnite element calculations (L¨anne et al., 1992; Gon¸calves et al., 2008) to study bulge formation in cylindrical tubes. While a phenomenological and qualitative understanding of aneurysm formation and growth can be obtained using hyperelastic models, they may not be suitable to describe the complex material response of a ﬁber-reinforced, multi-layered, and anisotropic arterial wall (Holzapfel et al., 2019). Attempts have been made to use more complex material models in ﬁnite element calculations (Alhayani et al., 2013; Demirkoparan and Merodio, 2017; Font et al., 2021; Topol et al., 2021; Dehghani et al., 2019). These studies indicate the asymmetry of aneurysm shape (Topol et al., 2021; Font et al., 2021) due to residual stresses, buckling without bulging (Dehghani et al., 2019), competition between radial expansion and axial propagation of a bulge (Alhayani et al., 2014), and the eﬀect of ﬁber reinforcement on the initiation of the aneurysm (Demirkoparan and Merodio, 2017). However, these computational studies do not address the rupture in the post bulging regime; the role of buckling in preventing it; the inﬂuence of arterial pre-tension on the occurrence of buckling, bulging and rupture. Signiﬁcantly, features such as stretch reversal and exponential stiﬀening are absent in hyperelastic material models and their inﬂuence on aneurysm evolution needs to be clariﬁed. tive material laws on the biomechanics of growth and rupture of the abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). To do so, we use the Gasser-Ogden-Holzapfel (GOH) constitutive model of arteries (Gasser et al., 2006) to account for exponential stiﬀening and stretch reversal (Sommer et al., 2010). Experimental protocols and ﬁnite element analyses are described in Section 2. Section 3 discusses re- This study aims to understand the inﬂuence of biologically relevant constitusults and factors governing the growth and rupture of an aneurysm, culminating in failure maps. Clinical implications and limitations are discussed. Cncluding remarks and avenues for further investigation are provided in Section 4. 2. Methodology calculations. Experiments on hyperelastic tube models will be used to validate the ﬁnite element methodology, which will then be extended to include biologically relevant material models. 2.1. Experiments on hyperelastic cylindrical tubes illustrated in Fig. 1. The purpose of these tests is to understand the deformation phenomena of buckling and kinking, and their inﬂuence on the axial and radial growth of a bulge. Here, the emphasis is on post bulge regime, and the inﬂuence of material models on this regime that has not been investigated in the literature. Material and geometric properties of the tubes used are given in Table. 1. A nominally straight cylindrical rubber tube is ﬁxed at its bottom, and the top end is attached to an Instron (model 5969) tensile tester’s jaw. A known pretension (pre-stretch) is applied by moving the jaw upward and then holding it ﬁxed at a prescribed displacement throughout the inﬂation test. The load cell reads the axial force (F ) in this displacement control test. The air inlet is attached to the top end of the tube and a pressure gauge reads the injection pressure. A DSLR camera (Nikon D7000) records the deformation of the tube during air injection and a pressure transducer records the internal pressure. An edge detection algorithm in MATLAB obtain the bulged proﬁle for further analysis. A number of experiments (39 in total) are performed for diﬀerent initial pre-tensions, F by changing the initial lengths of the tube. The initial diameter and the wall thickness are held ﬁxed in all the experiments. Depending on the initial pre- We ﬁrst present the experimental methodology, followed by ﬁnite element Inﬂation tests on ﬁnite latex rubber (hyperelastic) tubes are conducted as tension (F and(d), to be discussed later in Section 3.1. 2.2. Finite element analyses material and geometric parameters of the inﬂation test. We conduct FEA in two parts. In the ﬁrst part, virtual inﬂation tests on cylindrical hyperelastic tubes are performed. Initial tension is varied in these simulations. The purpose of these simulations is to verify the experimental observations of buckling in the post bulge regime as well as validate the modelling procedure. In the second part, we use this FEA procedure with a more biologically relevant GOH material ) two possible outcomes of the inﬂation tests are shown in Fig. 1(c) Finite element analysis (FEA) oﬀers the ability to systematically vary the model for the wall. placement degrees of freedom have been constrained at the lower end, and at the top end of the tube, as shown in Fig. 1(b). We can exploit symmetry of the boundary conditions by analyzing only one half of the tube. Note that this symmetry still allows the aneurysm to to grow radially asymmetric. The top end of the tube with half length, l, as shown in Fig. 1(b), coincides with the crown of the bulge and it is only constrained for the axial displacement to reﬂect symmetry. The plane of symmetry is also indicated. We use ABAQUS Perturbation Analysis (LPA) and Riks arc length method solvers to obtain the critical bifurcation modes and post bifurcation solution, respectively (Hibbit et al., 2012; Crisﬁeld, 1983). In stage 1 of the FEA, LPA has been performed to obtain the unstable mode shapes of a cylindrical tube subjected to a normalized unit value of prescribed axial stretch and internal pressure. The global nodal imperfection has been introduced based on the ﬁrst two circumferential modes (global bulge shape) and the ﬁrst axial mode. It should be noted that due to manufacturing defects, these imperfections naturally exist in the tubes subjected to the inﬂation test in Section 2.1. In stage 2, the desired pre-stretch is applied and held constant for various prescribed values, identical to that in experiments on rubber tubes. Finally, the inﬂation test is simulated by increasing the internal pressure. Both stages 2 and 3 use Riks method. 2012). We used 31 elements for the circumference and 199 elements along the length of the tube (6169 total). Element size and amplitude of imperfection are two important simulation parameters for the bifurcation analysis. For the Riks method, global nodal imperfection of order of 10 to element size, has been introduced for the ﬁrst two circumferential modes (global bulge shape) and the ﬁrst axial mode (buckling mode). The number of elements and the normalized (with respect element size) modal amplitude of imperfection (10 pressure associated with bulging instability. The FEA has been conducted in three stages. In experiments, all the dis- Linear shell elements with reduced integration (S4R) were used (Hibbit et al., 2.3. Material models hyperelastic wall material and anisotropic GOH model. For the hyperelastic model, we use two failure criteria, respectively based on Ogden’s strain energy function (SEF) and Gent’s criterion based on the ﬁrst stretch invariant. For the GOH model we Cauchy stress based failure criterion following (Sherifova and Holzapfel, 2019). expressed as where (λ an axisymmetric membrane. The material parameters are given in Table. 1 based on our previous experimental calibration (Hejazi et al., 2021). We used two diﬀerent rupture criteria: (1) The maximum strain energy density based on Ogden’s model in Eq. (1); (2) the maximum in-plane ﬁrst stretch invariant based on Gent’s material model (Gent, 1996), which reads First, we use the calibrated material parameters for Ogden’s strain energy function (SEF) in Eq. (1) to validate our FEA with experiments. Next, with identical assumptions as above, namely, axisymmetric membrane and plane stress, the Gasser-Ogden-Holzapfel (GOH) model’s SEF (W where, c of strain energy in the matrix and ﬁbers. The structural parameters are κ and γ represent the in-plane ﬁber gaussian distribution and ﬁber orientation with Two material models are considered in the ﬁnite element analyses: isotropic The Ogden’ SEF (W) for a cylindrical coordinate with plane stress can be and λ) are principal stretches in cylindrical coordinate system for W=c2(I− 3) +kkexp[k(κI+ (1 − 3κ)I− 1)] − 1, , k, and kare the material parameters regarding the contribution respect to circumferential direction (θ), respectively (Gasser et al., 2006). The ﬁrst term in the above equation containing c stored in the extra cellular matrix and the second term is the strain energy stored in reinforcing ﬁbers (collagen). k volume fraction and stiﬀness of collagen ﬁbers. The parameters used in the computations are given in Table. 1 baed on ex-vivo calibration test on AAA tissue samples (Niestrawska et al., 2019). 3. Results and discussion it with experiments and then use the FEA subsequently for diﬀerent material models, geometric parameters, and pre-tensions. 3.1. Rubber tube: modeling and experiments ternal pressure undergoes three stages of deformation as shown in Fig. 2(a): (1) uniform expansion, (2) radial expansion and axial growth of the aneurysm, (3) buckling and/or rupture. During the uniform expansion, the internal pressure increases monotonically until a global long-wavelength bulge forms with a In this section we ﬁrst validate the FEA modelling procedure by comparing With ﬁxed-ﬁxed boundary conditions, a pre-stretched tube subjected to inrelatively small amplitude. The formation of the long-wavelength bulge is associated with a reduction of pressure and it rapidly localizes forming the so-called aneurysm, or a bulge. Formation of the localized bulge leads to a sudden pressure relaxation. As the bulge region invades the straight portions of the tube, the axial force drops due to load relaxation. A compressive region forms outside the bulged region, since both ends are constrained, lateral buckling occurs. If the pre-stretch is high enough the tube may rupture without buckling. This is because the decrease in axial force due to an axially propagating bulge is insufﬁcient to overcome the pre-tension. For the case where buckling follows bulge formation, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the pressure-force curves show a good agreement between the experiments and the FEA. The FEA shows a slightly stiﬀer response due to slight diﬀerences in the material properties and discretization. In the post buckling regime, shown in Fig. 2(b), the normalized buckling amplitude ratio (c/d) versus bulge length fraction (l of agreement. In the early stages of buckling, the lateral displacement increases rapidly, but with the increasing buckling amplitude (c), we observe a hardening behaviour that leads to a plateau (indicated by 3 in Fig. 2(b)) in FEA. This deviation arises from the formation of a localized kink at the bottom end and the neck of the bulge (See Fig. 2(c)). Compared to FEA, the kink observed in the experiment, seeFig. 2(d)), is not as strong. Having veriﬁed the validity of FEA, we now can vary material model and other parameters. is shown in Fig. 3. Here, the normalized buckling amplitude is plotted against the fraction of the length of the tube, l axial propagation, the uniform section of the tube becomes shorter, and the end kink has a more predominant eﬀect on hardening transition in buckling amplitude development (see the transition region in Fig. 3(a)). The axial and radial propagation of a bulge is shown in Fig. 3(b). At the onset of bulge propagation, the uniform expansion is followed by the formation of a longwavelength bulge, which then becomes localized by growing in radial size. The radial propagation of the localized bulge gradually turns into axial propagation The eﬀect of pre-stretch on the progression of the buckling and bulge growth  until the buckling sets in. With buckling, the radial propagation declines and the bulge length development accelerates (Fig. 3(b)). This behaviour is a result of relaxation of axial force due to buckling, which allows the bulge to easily propagate along the length of the tube. However, with a higher pre-stretch, the bulge needs to invade longer until the buckling (and hence relaxation) develops. This means that the onset of buckling is delayed in Fig. 3(b). circumferential stretch (λ criteria, of Ogden and Gent, are compared. Using FEA, we ﬁrst obtained the Gent’s ﬁrst invariant stretch, Eq. (2), and Ogden’s SEF, Eq. (1), for all the data points throughout the inﬂation of the tube with diﬀerent pre-stretch values (1.75 ≤ λ tained for all the data points to delineate the safe-unsafe boundary with respect to rupture. Along these curves the pre-stretch varies as indicated in Fig. 4(a). By increasing the pre-stretch, the buckling amplitude falls as well as the max- A rupture portrait based on buckling amplitude ratio (c/d) and maximum ≤ 1.4). Then, the contour lines, shown in Fig. 4(a), have been obimum circumferential stretch. With a large enough pre-stretch (initial tension, F), rupture without buckling (see the diamond data points in Fig. 4(b)) occurs. Analytical buckling and rupture envelopes are obtained by following (Hejazi et al., 2021). A modiﬁed post-buckling rupture line based on FEA is shown for both Gent’s stretch invariant and Ogden’s strain energy density based on the contour lines in Fig. 4(a). At higher values of pre-stretch, Ogden’s criterion is conservative, and at lower pre-stretch values Gent’s criterion is conservative. This is due to the additional tensile strain energy induced by buckling. 3.2. GOH material model for the control case are given in Table. 1. for a hyperelastic tube, it can be observed that the decrease in pressure after the formation of the aneurysm is less pronounced for GOH. Hence, the propagation pressure for the aneurysm to spread along the length of the artery is lower. The We implemented the GOH material model from Eq. (3) with the parameters Comparing the inﬂation tests on a GOH tube shown in Fig. 5(a) with Fig. 2(a) two instability modes, bulging and buckling can be identiﬁed in the pressureforce curve in Fig. 5(b). Sudden drops in pressures and axial force follow the bulging and buckling, respectively. In GOH model, compressive forces may arise in the straight regions of the tube without a bulge formation due to stretch inversion. Buckling before bulging can occur, which is not possible in a hyperelastic tube. In Fig. 6(b), we can see a small drop in the pressure as the indicator of the bulge formation and an immediate increase in buckling amplitude indicating the lateral buckling. By comparing two diﬀerent cases with small (λ stretches, we see how the order of bulging and buckling may reverse (see also FEA results in Fig. 6(c) and (d)). sion making. Here, we investigated the axial and radial growth and the eﬀect of buckling on these two parameters. Fig. 7(a) shows the progression of the buckling amplitude (c) versus the bulge radial growth (λ A 3D bifurcation map for the tube with the aortic wall is shown in Fig. 6(a). The growth rate of an AAA is one of the important factors in clinical decipost bulge buckling (λ cases, the initial stage of the buckling is associated with a surge in amplitude (c), followed by a small decrease, and another increase of the amplitude. The Increasing pressureIncreasing pressure buckling and long-wavelength bulge initiate concurrently at the early stages. By the formation of the localized bulge, the buckling amplitude declines slightly, followed by signiﬁcant radial growth of the bulge. With the transition of radial growth into axial propagation, the buckling amplitude increases further until it reaches the hardening as a result of the reduction in uniform length and pinching eﬀects at the end. Also, with a longer bulge length, the maximum diameter tends to shrink as a result of relaxation of the axial force due to buckling. The axial propagation of the bulge (l see the formation of the long-wavelength bulge. The formation of the localized bulge results in a minor reduction in the bulge length (l crease in radial size. In the next stage of the propagation, the maximum radial size approximately remains constant (marginal reduction is observed) while the bulge propagates axially. model, subjected to axial pre-tension and internal pressure is shown in Fig. 8(a). By reducing the c Finally, the rupture map of a tube with the aortic wall with GOH material which is commonly observed for AAAs (Niestrawska et al., 2019). We showed two rupture thresholds by changing these parameters (c SEF function. The rupture criterion is based on the maximum Cauchy stress, which is located at the crown of the bulge on the outer wall with respect to buckling curvature. Similar to Fig. 4(a), we obtained the failure points using FEA for various pre-stretch values and sketched the failure boundary on buckling amplitude-circumferential stretch plot. Both of these parameters are easy to measure using common imaging techniques in clinical practice (e.g. CT scans and ultrasound). The control case has a qualitatively similar failure envelope compared to the hyperelastic tube in Fig. 4(a). With a larger buckling amplitude for low pre-tension tubes, a smaller circumferential stretch is needed for rupture to occur. However, in general, buckling acts as a fail safe mode, and postpones rupture. When buckling occurs, rupture takes place at a much larger size of the aneurysm, as shown in Fig. 8(a). The exponential stiﬀening is more pronounced at lower values of c the radial growth of the aneurysm and favours buckling. This is also evident in Fig. 8(b) which shows higher amplitudes of buckling (lower size of aneurysm) for decreasing c 3.3. Clinical implications ling. The ﬁrst one, buckling without bulge, is a result of stretch inversion, which is sensitive to microscopic ﬁber orientation and composition. The second mechanism, probably more relevant to AAAs, is the formation of the compressive force due to axial propagation of the aneurysm. It is not clear whether the buckling always follows the bulge or vice versa. However, many AAAs are commonly observed in a buckled state (Fillinger et al., 2004; Ducas et al., 2020; Hejazi et al., 2021) do not rupture at a much larger size (Choi et al., 2021). This study suggests that a straight aneurysm has a higher risk of rupture compared to a buckled aneurysm. In this study, we showed two mechanisms that may govern the arterial buck- 3.4. Limitations dynamics and ﬂuid-structure interactions. Such formidable calculations need to be attempted in the future, specially when the artery undergoes a structural instability like buckling. Arterial branches and the curvature imposed by spine posterior support are not considered. Nonetheless, the rupture maps for both the rubber tube and the tube with an aortic wall can provide useful information regarding the rupture of tortuous AAAs by correlating the 2D buckling amplitude and maximum diameter to the rupture risk. We anticipate such studies in the future. 4. Conclusion under ﬁxed-ﬁxed boundary conditions. We performed ﬁnite element calculations using ABAQUS Riks method solver. The FEA code has shown reasonable agreement with in vitro experiments on hyperelastic rubber tubes. With a validated FEA code, There are limitations of this study. The most signiﬁcant is the lack of haemo- We performed a series of inﬂation tests on rubber tubes with axial pre-tension we implemented the properties of the aortic wall using ﬁber-reinforced hyperelastic material with collagen and elastin ﬁbers. We investigated the bulging and buckling instabilities, and explored the bulge growth and rupture in post bulge/buckling regime. We implemented diﬀerent AAA pathogenesis scenarios by changing the material parameters associated with ﬁber deposition and degradation. We presented a rupture map in the plane of buckling amplitude plotted against maximum circumferential stretch, both of which can be measured using 2D clinical images (CT and ultrasound) with minimal technical requirements (e.g. 3D image reconstruction). We concluded that the post bulge buckling is a protective mechanism against rupture. Acknowledgment tional Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through Discovery Grant. Discussions with Prof. Y. Hsiang from the Vancouver General Hospital are thankfully acknowledged. We gratefully acknowledge the funding provided for this research by the Na-