Department of Physics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523 ﬁt with physically-motivated analytic functions [24, 25], or numeric lineshape models [21]. In this measurement, we have chosen the former. 2S-8D transition, the 8D atoms preferentially decay back to the 1S state through nP states, with only about 5% decaying back to the 2S state [4]. If we assume that the population in the upper state is small and that the coherences adiabatically follow the populations, the optical Bloch equations may be approximated as where Ω is the two-photon Rabi frequency, γ is the decay rate from the excited state, and ∆ν is the detuning from the two-photon resonance. Since we are detecting the population remaining in the ground state, we decouple the diﬀerential equations to ﬁnd The solution, assuming a time-dependent Rabi frequency, is given by Here, we have assumed that the detuning is constant, which is only approximately true due to the varying AC Stark shift as the atom traverses the laser beam. From Eqn. 5, we ﬁnd that a physically motivated ﬁt function is given by where L α is the Lorentzian amplitude, and A accounts for the oﬀ-resonant metastable count rate. In recent laser spectroscopy of hydrogen, experimentally obtained resonances have been To obtain these analytic functions, we begin with the optical Bloch equations. For the is a Lorentzian function with width γ, νis the center frequency of the transition, taken into account (F=2 and F=3). To account for this structure, we adjust our ﬁtting function to give where the subscript denotes the hyperﬁne component of the 8D of laser polarization. In addition, the natural linewidth and transit-time broadening are both independent of the hyperﬁne state so that we can safely assume that γ hyperﬁne splitting of the 8D a ﬁxed relationship between ν frequency, ν where the ratio of the amplitudes of the Lorentzian functions (L of 1 to 3.5. An example of a single scan ﬁt with Eqn. 8 is shown in supplemental Fig. 1. The 2S−8Dtransition also contains unresolved hyperﬁne structure that must be is given by αα=3.5 due to the relative strengths of the transitions – this is independent powers, determine the centroid frequencies for individual scans, and extrapolate these to zero laser power. For these extrapolations, we again use simple, analytic functions, which we justify below. where β extrapolations can exhibit nonlinear behavior when measuring ensembles of trajectories and when appreciable saturation of the transition occurs. In the case of many atomic trajectories contributing to the overall line, the contribution of each trajectory is weighted by the population driven in that particular trajectory. Therefore, the average AC Stark shift where D(s)represents the spatial distribution of atomic trajectories, and s is the transverse distance from the peak of the 778 nm Gaussian intensity proﬁle. The spectroscopy signal is determined by counting the quenched fraction of the metastable atoms, given by 1 −ρ From the analysis of the 2S spectroscopy signal given by where κ and k are scaling constants, and P follows from Eq. (5) and the fact that Ω is proportional to P For low intracavity power, ρ where f (s)and g(s)are spatially dependent functions without P we see that ∆ν suitable. To account for the AC Stark shift, we perform scans of the resonance at various laser The shift due to the AC Stark eﬀect can be written as expansion of 1 −ρ this approximation of 1 −ρ where h and the width of the spectroscopy laser beam’s transverse Gaussian proﬁle. Therefore, the nonlinearity introduced to the AC extrapolation is predominantly cubic. One should note that this conclusion does not rely on the exact form of the metastable distribution, D(s), and the accuracy of this result has been conﬁrmed with the numeric model (described in the next section). that ﬁtting functions described above are suﬃciently accurate. We have developed a numeric model based on density matrices, which allows for a description of repopulation of the 2S state, and a model based on state amplitudes. We have found that the repopulation of the 2S state via spontaneous emission produces shifts of <±10 Hz in the extrapolated AC-Starkshift-free resonance frequency. Therefore, we focus on the state amplitude treatment here, since that treatment allows for the inclusion of DC Stark eﬀects in a much simpler manner. excitation with 243 nm laser radiation tuned to the 1S splitting of the 1S and 2S states is large enough that there is eﬀectively no population in the 2S F =1, m have the same magnitude [6], the 2S F =1 hyperﬁne manifold is equally populated as well. The lifetime of the 2S transit time of the metastable beam through the apparatus. We choose to drive the 2S The two-photon selection rules for ∆L =2 using linearly polarized light, and with the laser polarization deﬁning quantization axis, dictate that ∆m We may estimate the eﬀect of saturation by keeping an additional term in the series and hare constants determined by the spread of metastable atomic trajectories The numeric model is used primarily for quantifying the DC Stark shifts and to verify Roughly 15 cm before the spectroscopic region, the 2S state is populated via a two-photon transition with linearly polarized light, which deﬁnes the z-axis in the experiment. dipole-allowed transitions and a lineshape distortion due to the mixing of the nearly degenerate 8D is calculated with second-order perturbation theory. Both the mixing and the quadratic shift are included in the state amplitude equations. levels with g, e, and f respectively. The coupled set of diﬀerential equations describing the interaction is given by The couplings introduced by the DC electric ﬁeld causes a quadratic shift due to nearby We label the state amplitudes for the hyperﬁne components of the 2S, 8D, and 8F where ω is the laser frequency, ω and j, E is the magnitude of the stray electric ﬁeld, Ω frequency [6], δω Stark and second order-Doppler detuning terms, and U connecting states iand j(i.e. −i eﬀect and the second-order Doppler eﬀect is given by where β intensity seen by an atom traversing through the laser beam a distance s away from the Gaussian beam center at velocity v, which is given by The time-dependent Rabi frequency seen by an atom in a speciﬁc trajectory is likewise given where β trajectory, we numerically integrate Eqns. (14-16) to ﬁnd a lineshape the eﬀect of the diﬀerent trajectories, we integrate distribution ρ(s, v)to ﬁnd the full linshape, given by The function ρ(s, v) is determined by time-of-ﬂight measurements [7], and the geometric constraints set by the metastable hydrogen/243 nm light overlap and the divergence of the atomic hydrogen beam. tify the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld. A single scan of the 2S ﬁcient to quantify the distortion, therefore many scans are averaged together before being ﬁt with the numeric model. When averaging lines, we choose several lines with nominally equal photodiode voltage. For averaging, we have chosen a PD voltage that corresponds to quenching approximately 20% of the total metastable ﬂux. We ﬁnd that the electric ﬁelds determined in situ on the 2S (j)is the state dependent AC Stark shift coeﬃcient. I(t, v, s)is the time-dependent The distortion present on the 2S-8Dand the 2S-12Dlineshapes is used to quanelectric ﬁeld on the 2S ﬁt with the numeric model are shown in supplemental Fig. 3. shapes is insensitive to the polarization of the spectroscopy light. However, from investigations with the lineshape model, we ﬁnd that the nature of the distortion is highly contingent upon the relative orientation of the stray ﬁeld and the spectroscopy light. From this, we conclude that the stray electric ﬁeld must be nearly perpendicular to all possible laser polarizations – i.e. along the direction of the light propagation. In Fig. 4, we show the day with the same lineshape generated by the numeric model overlaid. As shown in the ﬁgure, the distortion is consistent as the polarization is rotated. We have additionally included an example of the 2S ﬁeld as the relative orientation of the light polarization and stray ﬁeld is varied, which shows a clear variation in the lineshape as the relative angle changes. We have investigated this polarization dependence of the 2S and have found similar insensitivity to the light polarization, indicating that the stray ﬁeld orientation was nearly perpendicular to the light ﬁeld throughout the experiment. We ﬁnd that the distortion present on the experimentally measured 2S-12Dline- -12Dline excited by four linear polarizations (horizontal, vertical, ±45) on a given we ﬁrst remove data points where there was a problem with excitation of the 1S-2S transition due to laser lock breaks, which manifest as far statistical outliers in the metastable count Before ﬁtting each scan of the 2S−8Dresonance with the ﬁt function, F(A, α, ν, γ), rate. Similarly, spurious lock breaks of the 778 nm power enhancement cavity are removed, which are evident on the 778 nm transmission diode. A scan of the 2S composed of 25 frequency points if no outliers are removed – scans composed of fewer than 20 points are omitted entirely from the data analysis. In a typical day of data acquisition, less than 5% of all individual data points are omitted. When ﬁtting scans with F(A, α, ν each data point in the scan is weighted by the estimated shot noise for that point. individual resonance scans. We ﬁrst assign error bars to the individual data points based on shot noise. This results in a χ which is typically 21 for a full scan of 25 points with 4 ﬁt parameters. While χ greater than one, this is expected due to the contribution of some technical noise arising from variations in the atomic beam ﬂux. Therefore, the error bars on the individual data points are scaled until χ with any shift (possible density eﬀects are discussed later and shown to be negligible). V , which is proportional to the intracavity power. In a day of data acquisition, the set of to zero intracavity power. The data set is ﬁt with a cubic function of the form ν ν+aV +bV data point. For these ﬁts, we typically ﬁnd χ a variance of day’s worth of data, we then correct the extrapolated centroid frequency for the DC Stark shift (see main text for further discussion). mean of the resonance frequency, ¯ν, and variance, ¯σ mean frequency is given by ¯σ in excellent agreement with statistical ﬂuctuations as we ﬁnd a reduced chi-squared statistic of 1.05. Therefore, there is no evidence of signiﬁcant and varying systematic eﬀects in the data set. The reduced chi-squared statistic is used to quantify to goodness-of-ﬁt when analyzing Each line ﬁt results in a hyperﬁne centroid (ν±σ) for a given 778 nm photodiode voltage , ν}obtained from the scans of the resonance allow for an AC Stark extrapolation We obtained 17 days’ worth of data (shown in the main text) and calculate the statistical shifts, is addressed in the main text and the preceding sections. Here, we discuss smaller systematic eﬀects. ity in the lab frame, c is the speed of light, and ν is the rest-frame resonance frequency. We have characterized the velocity distribution of our metastable hydrogem beam through time-of-ﬂight measurements [7]. From these investigations, we have found that the velocity distribution is modiﬁed from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution by the excitation and detection dynamics to P (v)∝v beam is estimated with a silicon diode temperature probe mounted on the surface of the cryogenic nozzle. Doppler shift on an ensemble of atoms is well-approximated by calculating the shift associated with the most-probable velocity class. The uncertainty associated with the mostprobable velocity for a given nozzle temperature reading is < 10 m/s. Fitting the timeof-ﬂight measurements obtained in [7] gives a second-order Doppler shift of −1475(25)Hz at 9.5 K and −930(11) Hz at 5.9 K. Spectroscopy was performed on the atomic beam for temperatures between 4.5 K and 4.9 K, which corresponds to a second-order Doppler shift of -0.73(10) kHz. This shift is corrected for in our ﬁnal measurement as indicated in the main text. composed of high-permeability metal (mu-metal) centered around the 778 nm light/atom interaction region. We have simulated the attenuation of Earth’s ﬁeld in the center of the shields and we expect residual magnetic ﬁelds of less than 1 mG within the spectroscopic volume. Our method for accounting for our two largest systematic eﬀects, the AC and DC Stark The second-order Doppler eﬀect enters as ∆ν=−(vc)ν, where v is the atom veloc- Investigations with the numeric lineshape model indicate that the net second-order We passively mitigate Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld with a pair of concentric magnetic shields which is given by where B is the magnetic ﬂux density, g linearly polarized spectroscopy light the linear Zeeman eﬀect only causes a broadening of the resonance. However, with circularly polarized light oriented about a stray magnetic ﬁeld, a shift can occur. spectroscopy of the 2S splitting of these two lines amounts to maximum of 3.7 kHz (limited by the statistics of the measurement), indicating that the maximal possible Zeeman shift is 1.9 kHz. From the maximal possible shift of 1.9 kHz, we estimate a magnetic ﬁeld strength of 0.6 mG, which is in good agreement with our magnetic shields simulation. light. We have measured the polarization purity by determining the maximum polarization extinction ratio, given as R, with a polarizing beamsplitter after the 778 nm enhancement cavity and found that R ≤0.01. This leads to a maximum imbalance in the right versus left components of ≈20%. By assuming this maximum imbalance in the transition amplitudes between all hyperﬁne components, we ﬁnd that the measured 1.9 kHz shift should be suppressed by a factor of ≈3.4, leading to a maximal shift of 0.56 kHz from the Zeeman eﬀect. uncertainty. Higher-order Zeeman corrections are negligible at our current level of precision. frequency reference. This source is used to reference two frequency counters which redundantly monitor the frequency comb repetition rate. Our optical frequency comb is based on an erbium-ﬁber oscillator centered at 1550 nm. The comb oﬀset frequency, f and a comb mode near 1550 nm is stabilized indirectly to an ultra-stable cavity with the help of a transfer laser oscillator. By measuring the repetition rate and phase locking f The linear Zeeman eﬀect causes a shift of a magnetic sublevel with quantum number m, In order to quantify the possibility of a residual Zeeman shift, we have also performed This maximal 1.9 kHz shift is suppressed by the polarization purity of the spectroscopy Since this represents an upper bound, we apply no shift and assume ±0.56 kHz as the full A GPS-trained Rb-oscillator (Stanford Research systems FS740) provides our absolute the comb, the absolute frequency of all comb teeth are determined. Since the Coherent-899 Ti:Sapphire and the 972 nm ECDL (quadrupled to 243 nm to excite the 1S-2S transition) are coherently phase-locked to the comb, we can determine the absolute frequency of those lasers from the RF beat note frequencies. frequencies via for the 972 nm laser system and for the 778 nm spectroscopy laser. The factor of two multiplying f frequency double the frequency comb output before performing the beat note with the 778 nm light. The repetition rate of the frequency comb is determined by the frequency counters over 100 s gates, and a typical day’s data amounts to 5000-20000 s of f 2S-8D resonance. The phase noise of the 778 nm light is strongly suppressed by phase-locking to the frequency comb. Nevertheless, we have quantiﬁed the phase noise distribution on the 778 nm light by investigating the beat note. By convolving the observed spectral density with our ﬁt function, we estimate the laser noise amounts to a 5 Hz shift and 2 kHz of line broadening. Both are negligible eﬀects. GPS-disciplined FS740 by locally counting a 5 MHz signal provided by the NIST WWVB station in Fort Collins, Colorado for 17 hours. We have found a fractional frequency counter oﬀset of +5×10 [8]. A typical day’s worth of data is composed of 10 frequency stability of 3 ×10 apply a -0.40(40) kHz correction associated with the measured fractional frequency oﬀset, and assume the frequency instability of the Rb-oscillator and oﬀsets are uncorrelated. We therefore assign a frequency calibration correction of −0.40(47)kHz. The RF beat notes with the optical frequency comb can be converted into absolute atomic In principle, an asymmetric spectral distribution of the spectroscopy laser could pull the As mentioned in the main text, we have veriﬁed the absolute frequency calibration of the atoms. The oﬀ-resonant contribution of the blackbody radiation causes an additional AC Stark shift while the resonant contribution dominantly reduces the lifetime of the states of interest. Numeric calculations of the blackbody shift at 300 K on the 8D states indicate that a shift of 0.49 kHz is expected [9] – the 2S state is unperturbed at our level of precision. The previous measurement of the 2S-8D transitions measured the blackbody shift at 300 K to be 0.65(16)kHz by heating the magnetic shields surrounding the spectroscopic volumes by 30 K [4], which is in excellent agreement with the theoretical estimation of 0.49 kHz. We therefore apply a blackbody correction of −0.49(16)kHz. water and atomic hydrogen. Collisions between a hydrogen atom and a water molecule results in the hydrogen atom experiencing a varying electric ﬁeld due to the intrinsic dipole moment of the water molecule, which is about 0.72 e a hydrogen atoms are dominated by the Van der Waals interactions. To estimate potential shifts associated with pressure, we use the impact approximation [11, 12]. ments and at poor vacuum were broader than predicted by up to tens of kHz, with the 12D more strongly eﬀected than the 8D line. We believe this broadening was due to collisions with water molecules. In a collision with a water molecule, hydrogen atoms in the 8D state may be quenched to nearby 8P and 8F states from the varying electric ﬁeld. simulations of the collisions between hydrogen and water molecules. From these simulations, we ﬁnd a 16 GHz/Torr broadening and a 3 MHz/Torr shift on the 8D line and 37 GHz/Torr broadening, 3 MHz/Torr shift on the 12D line. For pressures in the range of a 10 this corresponds to ∼10 kHz of broadening, which roughly agrees with our observation of broadened lines when we attempted to measure lines with relatively poor vacuum. The associated pressure shift is many order of magnitude below the associated broadening – 1 The blackbody radiation emitted by nearby thermal surfaces perturbs the hydrogen The most likely gas species to participate in collisions with the spectroscopy atoms are The linewidths of the 2S-8D and 2S-12D transitions obtained in preliminary measure- To quantify possible shifts associated with such collisions, we have employed Monte Carlo kHz of broadening would correspond to a ∼0.1 Hz shift. While we do not see evidence of this broadening on our data used in the AC extrapolations, it is diﬃcult to exclude the possibility of 1 kHz broadening on a ≈ 600 kHz line, and therefore set an upper limit of pressure shifts due to water collisions at 0.1 Hz. shifts on the 2S which results in an associated energy shift of with n=n we assume atom 1 to be the perturbing atom and atom 2 to be the perturbed atom. Under the impact approximation, the C to Van der Waals interactions, which is given by Here, v is the relative velocity between the two hydrogen atoms and N [13, 24]. where the integral-sum symbol indicates that the continuum contribution is also considered. For clarity, we have not included the angular factors seen in Eqn. 26, which is justiﬁed since we will ﬁnd the possible systematic shifts associated with these collisions are very small. We make the substitution ∆(m The sum (including the continuum contribution) over m expression as a function of the energy diﬀerence ∆(m – for this, we used the Sturmian formalism which may also be used to calculate the matrix elements and AC Stark coeﬃcients for two-photon transitions [6, 14]. Therefore, calculating In principle, the Van der Waals interaction between hydrogen atoms may also induce The Van der Waals interaction energy may be estimated with the C over m is more diﬃcult. As an upper bound for the continuum contribution, we multiply the maximal value of S(∆(m perturbing atom; the continuum contribution for the perturbing 1S and 2S hydrogen atoms can be found in [15] section 63, table 13 as 0.849 a care must be taken when the perturbing atom is in the 2Sstate due to the near degeneracy of the 2S-8P and 2P-8D transitions. For these transitions, we assume the smallest energy splittings between the ﬁne-structure components (≈1 GHz), and the largest dipole matrix element to provide the upper bound. From this, we ﬁnd and with the C atomic hydrogen density of 10 atoms in the metastable state. From Eqn. (28), this corresponds to a shift of ∼1 Hz from Van der Waals interactions, which is far below our current level of precision. cross-damping, or quantum interference [16–19, 24, 25]. This eﬀect appears when there are nearby oﬀ-resonant transitions and the ﬂuorescence from spontaneous emission of the excited state is detected. This eﬀect is almost entirely absent if all possible decay channels are equally accounted for, or if the remaining metastable population is detected instead of ﬂuorescence [17, 19]. Since we are detecting remaining metastable population, our measurement is insensitive to this systematic. the lineshape ﬁtting function. The splitting of the F =3 and F =2 manifolds of the 8D coeﬃcients requires summing the squared dipole moments multiplied by S(∆(m)) . While the sum over the bound states is straightforward, the continuum contribution Of particular interest in many of the recent hydrogen measurements is an eﬀect known as The hyperﬁne structure of the 8Dstate is unresolved and is therefore included into state is calculated to be 142.43(14) kHz [5]. Modifying the hyperﬁne splitting terms in the lineshape ﬁtting function by ±140 Hz results in shifts of the ﬁt resonance frequency of ±30 Hz, which we take as the uncertainty. has a small voltage oﬀset of about <5 mV that can vary slightly from day to day. This oﬀset shifts the zero-intensity resonance frequency determined by the AC extrapolations. The AC Stark shift is about 300 kHz for a transmission PD voltage of 6 V. Therefore, the uncertainty introduced by a variation of 5 mV is about 250 Hz, which is taken as an additional uncertainty. Aside from DC oﬀsets, a nonlinear response in the experimental detector would also introduce a shift to the AC extrapolated frequencies. Therefore, we have also tested the linearity of the experimental detector by comparing with a test detector. The 778 nm power is sent to the experimental detector, with a fraction of the light power picked oﬀ for the test detector. This data is then ﬁt with the function where a nonlinear response of the photodiode, and we ﬁnd an upper bound of b This nonlinearity can be accounted for by adjusting the AC extrapolation ﬁtting function to ν(V )=ν take as an additional uncertainty. We assume the oﬀset and nonlinearity of the photodiode are uncorrelated and assign a net uncertainty of 0.32 kHz for photodiode imperfections. the 8D has a smaller matrix element than the 2S assume that they are equal. We estimate this eﬀect by ﬁtting a single Lorentzian to a pair of Lorentzians separated by 57.13 MHz and ﬁnd a shift of less than 1 Hz, which is negligible. The photodiode and data acquisition electronics recording the 778 nm cavity transmission Nearby atomic resonances can pull the resonance frequency of interest. Transitions to state are the closest (57.13 MHz) that can contribute. The 2S−8Dtransition trajectories due to the AC Stark shift of the 2Sstate. The energy shift of the 2Sstate is given by where β by the atom. The nonzero gradient of I( region of diﬀering AC Stark shift. We estimate an upper bound for the possible deﬂection, given as δ by assuming the maximal possible gradient of I for a given power, during the transit time. This can be estimated as For 50 W in a Gaussian beam with a beam diameter of 600 µm, this corresponds to a maximal deﬂection of ∼10 nm. This can correspond to an intensity variation of 10 ppm at most, which could vary the resulting AC Stark shift by a few Hz at the largest intensities. This eﬀect is negligible at our current level of precision. on the extraction of the Rydberg constant in hydrogen spectroscopy [20]. Here, β is the eﬀective strength of the potential, and α gives the length scale. Following the discussion in [20], we allow for the sign of β to be both positive and negative. on the hydrogen energy levels, given by δE(n, l). The eﬀect of this perturbation on an extraction of the Rydberg energy, Ry =hcR Metastable atoms traversing the 778 nm intensity proﬁle are deﬂected from straight-line Here we discuss the eﬀect of an additional perturbative potential of the form We use ﬁrst-order perturbation theory to calculate the eﬀect of this perturbing potential given by where E(n, l) is the energy of an unperturbed energy level and the subscripts 2 and 1 indicate the upper and lower states respectively, and δRy is the change in the Rydberg energy determination. In Fig. 5, we show, δRy, scaled by βa As can be seen, the perturbation generally gives a larger Rydberg constant extraction as n and n by scaling the eﬀective strength of the potential to β =1.64 ×10 extractions of the Rydberg constant through hydrogen laser spectroscopy can be signiﬁcantly reduced. This result is shown in Fig. 6. The extractions with this example Yukawa potential perturbation have a reduced chi-squared statistic of 2.0 while the data shown in Fig. 5 of the main text has a reduced chi-squared statistic of 4.0. increase provided that β is positive. By considering an example length scale of α =34 a, where ais the Bohr radius, and