Cem Sevik,Mikhail Petrov,Jonas Bekaert,and Milorad V. Miloˇsevi´c University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B-2020 Antwerp, Belgium plications is well established [1–3], as demonstrated for example through both theoretical and experimental studies with regard to transistors [4, 5], energy harvesters [6–9], and sensors [10–12]. Recently, with the successful fabrication of 2D metallic materials such as In [13], Pb [14], NbSe and twisted bilayer graphene [24], superconductivity has been added to the range of properties yielding possible applications. However, taking advantage of that potential requires a detailed investigation and understanding of the origins and behavior of the superconductivity in these two-dimensional systems, to ensure reproducibly robust superconducting behavior up to suﬃciently high temperatures. at the 3D-to-2D transition are the layered hexagonal metal borides (MB space group symmetry. Among them, bulk MgB two decades, and is still the electron-phonon (e-ph) mediated superconductor with highest The potential of two-dimensional (2D) materials in terms of future technological ap- One of the well-known material families to examine the behavior of superconductivity experimentally realized superconducting transition temperature at ambient pressure to date material has led to an immensely intensiﬁed interest in this area and a paradigm shift in superconductivity research. On that wave, superconductivity has also been experimentally validated in identical bulk crystals of ZrB down to monolayer thicknesses, MgB of the surface states [29], leading to three-gap superconductivity with T monolayer limit [30], strongly changing with every added monolayer, up to several nanometers thickness. Moreover, a strong increase in the T hydrogenation and tensile strain have been revealed [31]. With the same crystal structure, single-layer AlB surpassing single-layer MgB not least, one is also interested in possible growth of MB metal layer sandwiched between two boron honeycomb networks. In that respect, Li, Be, Mg, Al, and Ga-based MB superconducting nature, all with T clearly indicates the potential of layered metal boride systems to realize two-dimensional superconductivity. borides. When considering the experimentally grown bulk metal-borides with the same crystal symmetry [34], one notices that e-ph mediated superconducting properties of Ca, Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Cr, Mo, W and Re based 2D MBenes have not been explored. As a matter of fact, a recent ﬁrst-principles study indicated the feasibility of synthesizing the layered MAB bulk crystals of hexagonal metal borides of Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Mo, and W, starting from the MAB bulk crystals [35], from which 2D MBenes are exfoliable (with name derived analogously to MXenes obtained from MAX bulk phases [36]). Note however that layer-by-layer exfoliation of these materials is not as straightforward as for graphene, due to the strong interaction between the metal and the boron layers. Therefore, one must consider several possible 2D formations, including MgB two honeycomb B lattices, where the metal atoms are placed in the centers of honeycombs), of honeycombs), and M = 39 K) [25]. The experimental demonstration of two-gap superconductivity in this It is therefore instructive to have a comparative analysis of diﬀerent possible 2D metal- (a B layer in a honeycomb lattice and a layer of metal atoms sitting above the centers of metal atoms sitting above/below the centers of honeycombs). Therefore, in this paper we comprehensively investigated superconductivity in diﬀerent exfoliable MBene structures, with particular attention to Ca, Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Cr, Mo, W, and Re based ones, in comparison to the previously studied Be, Mg, and Al based di- and tetra-borides. Following the selection of the most prominent superconducting MBenes, we detail their anisotropic superconducting properties, origin of their multiple superconducting gaps and their high critical temperature. approaches and adopted parameters for the calculations. Then, we present detailed isotropic Eliashberg theory results for all the considered materials. These results are then used to select the materials that potentially possess good superconducting properties. Finally, we summarize the results of detailed anisotropic Eliashberg calculations for the selected materials. Extensive additional results for electronic, vibrational, and superconducting properties are made available in the Supplementary Material. tional theory (DFT), as implemented within the ABINIT [37, 38] code, using the PerdewBurke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. Relativistic pseudopotentials from the PseudoDojo project [39] were used where we could include spin-orbit coupling (SOC) if necessary. Namely, we calculated electronic structures both without and with SOC for all compounds, and if signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found in the states responsible for collective electron behavior, i.e. those near the Fermi level (E further calculations. Within the used pseudopotentials 10 + N valence electrons were used for metal elements of group N, except for Be (4 valence electrons), and 3 valence electrons were taken into account for B. An energy cutoﬀ value of 60 Ha for the plane-wave basis and a dense 36×36×1 k-point grid were used to achieve high accuracy. The structures, with at least 16 Subsequently, to calculate phonons and the electron–phonon coupling we employed density functional perturbation theory (DFPT), also within ABINIT [40], using the same electronic k-point grid and a 12×12×1 phononic q-point grid. For the calculations of the supercon- The organization of the paper is as follows. First, we describe the used computational The considered metal boride layers, 45 in total, were investigated through density funcducting state we used isotropic Eliashberg theory, a quantitatively accurate extension to the Bardeen–Cooper–Schrieﬀer (BCS) theory for phonon-mediated superconductivity [41– 43]. We evaluated the superconducting T screened Coulomb repulsion of µ compounds [47]. In addition, the cohesive energy values of the structures (per atom) were calculated using the following formula: where E and E materials with more positive E tion of the fully anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equation was obtained through the ElectronPhonon Wannier (EPW) code [48–50]. For that part, ﬁrst-principles calculations were performed with the Quantum ESPRESSO package [51], using the same PBE pseudopotentials. The cutoﬀs for the plane-wave basis and charge density were set to 100 Ry and 400 Ry, respectively. The k-point mesh for the integration in wave-vector space was set to 24×24×1, and electronic smearing was performed within the Methfessel-Paxton scheme [52]. With these parameters, the structures were fully optimized until the Hellman-Feynman forces on each atom were below 10 culated based on the density-functional perturbation theory as implemented in Quantum ESPRESSO package [53], using a q-mesh of 12×12×1. The maximally localized Wannier functions [54, 55] required in the EPW calculations were interpolated by using an unshifted Brillouin-zone k-mesh of 12×12×1. The solution of the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations was computed with interpolated k- and q-point grids of 240×240×1 and 120×120×1, which are suﬃciently dense to guarantee convergence of the superconducting gaps. The cutoﬀ for the fermion Matsubara frequencies ω the same as in the isotropic calculations (0.13). Subsequently, for the materials predicted to possess high Tvalues, self-consistent soluboride structures were predicted and compared with the available data. The calculated As the ﬁrst step, the equilibrium lattice structures of the considered three diﬀerent metalin-plane lattice constants listed in the Supplementary Material are in good agreement both with available experimental values for bulk structures [18, 26, 34, 56] and with calculated values for the same single-layer crystals in the literature [29, 32, 57]. The phonon dispersions presented in the Supplementary Material clearly point out the dynamical stability of all the considered crystals except BeB cohesive energy value, a widely accepted parameter used to evaluate the chemical stability of crystals (see Eq. 1), was evaluated for each monolayer. Promisingly, the corresponding values presented in Table II are comparable with the ones obtained for several experimentally realized monolayers, e.g., graphene (7.46 eV per atom), silicene (3.71 eV per atom), and black phosphorene (2.57 eV per atom). Based on these results, MB ground-state structure for Be, Mg, Ca, Sc, V, Cr, Mo, and Al based monolayers, while M was the favorable structure for the Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta, W, and Re based ones. nearly all the structures to be metallic. However, TiB possessing a Dirac cone at the Fermi level as previously reported [57]. Also, BeB HfB states at Fermi level due to single or multiple Dirac cones close to Fermi level, which is a clear obstacle for the formation of the superconducting state. As a result of this preliminary Subsequently, we investigated the electronic properties of each material and we found , CrB, MoB, and WBwere predicted to possess a very low electronic density of analysis, we eliminated these materials and computed the superconducting properties for the other candidates. Our isotropic Eliashberg theory calculations show that ﬁve MB materials, BeB Indeed, our results for the superconducting transition temperature T the ones obtained in these references (where anisotropic Eliashberg theory was used). Also, the T calculated by Liao et al. in Ref. [58] (23.2 K). and 20.4 K were identiﬁed as the most prominent superconductors. Also, the group-5-based compounds VB , and two MBcrystals from Table I possess a sizable superconducting T. Among these obtained for MgBin this study (22.2 K), is in very good agreement with the one Among these materials, CaB, CaB, NbB, and ScBwith high Tvalues 36.1, 41.6, 35.5, in terms of electronic properties, as one can see in Supplementary Material. Therefore, two distinct sets of partially occupied bands contribute to superconductivity, mainly arising from covalent bonding, σ (s + p to the σ states around the Γ point, the non-bonding π orbitals, contributing Fermi level states centered around the K point, have distinct superconducting properties, as is also the case for MgB metal d states should be taken into consideration for VB et al. investigated how d orbitals stemming from Nb split into (d ) around the Fermi level in NbB[60]. Having evaluated the results obtained within the isotropic limit, we decided to focus further on several materials with the most promising superconducting properties. Thus, we performed fully anisotropic Eliashberg calculations for CaB ScB ductors among the considered structures. The Fermi surface of CaB closely resembles that of MgB Both σ and π electronic states are localized in the layer of boron atoms while the surface state is mainly localized on top of the Ca layer facing vacuum. The Fermi surface of CaB shown in Fig. 1 (f), for the most part retains the same features as CaB Since the calcium layer in CaB state is suppressed. The phonon band structures of the calcium borides, as shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (d), are quite diﬀerent. In CaB by an energy gap, which gets completely suppressed in CaB of the corresponding atomic displacements in both compounds. These diﬀerent phonon dispersions lead to diﬀerent electron-phonon coupling (EPC) in the two compounds, as shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (d). As can be seen from the Eliashberg function α and optical phonon modes contribute almost equally to the total EPC of 1.59, whereas for CaB distinction in the Eliashberg function between acoustic and optical phonon modes. The total EPC of the calcium tetraboride is 1.43 which is slightly lower than in the diboride. As in the case of MgB comes from one in-plane optical phonon mode, belonging to the E diﬀerences in the character of the EPC in CaB in the former are fairly localized around the Γ point while in the latter there is also a sizable contribution from other parts of the Brillouin zone (particularly along Γ-M). tronic states on the Fermi surface contribute to superconductivity, through the anisotropic gap spectrum ∆(k). At a temperature of 5 K, the largest ∆ values, reaching as high as 17.4 meV in CaB anisotropic, ranging from 1.7 to 7.5 meV (Fig. 1 (c)). The superconducting gap distribution for calcium diboride, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), shows two distinct superconducting gaps: the strongest σ-state gap, and a highly anisotropic gap which is a hybrid formed by the π and in order to fully characterize the origin and behavior of superconductivity in MBenes. Calcium borides – CaBand CaB– have proven to be the most prominent supercon- , due to the absence of the gap in the phonon dispersion, one cannot make a clear Based on our fully anisotropic Eliashberg calculations, we can analyze how diﬀerent electhe surface electronic states. We proceeded solving the anisotropic Eliashberg equations for increasing temperatures until the gaps vanished, yielding a critical temperature of CaB around 70 K. The picture for CaB Since the surface electronic state is absent in the tetraboride, its lowest gap is now only formed by the π electronic state, and thus is much less anisotropic (Fig. 1 (e)). At 5 K temperature, the highest gap value of CaB over, the two σ electronic sheets on the Fermi surface, which form the strongest gap in the diboride case, give rise to two slightly separated gaps in the tetraboride case (by less than 1 meV at 5 K). As compared to CaB lower critical temperature of 64 K. show promise to be good superconductors. Particularly, the critical temperature of NbB the isotropic limit is 35.5 K, which is 3 times higher than the isotropic value in monolayer MgB inﬂuence on phonons and EPC. With the standard electronic smearing value of 0.01 Ha, both structures show negative phonon frequencies in the vicinity of the K point, suggesting that the structures are not in their ground state. The unstable phonon mode, as shown in Fig. 2 (h), is an acoustic mode with out-of-plane vibrations of Nb/Ta atoms. phonons (Fig. 2 (a) and (d)). However, the instability transforms into a softening in the Diborides of transition metals from group 5 of the periodic table – V, Nb and Ta – also . However, for Nb and Ta diborides, we found that electronic smearing has a critical By increasing the smearing value to 0.03 Ha, we managed to get rid of the negative phonon dispersions of both compounds at the K point. These dips, as shown in Fig. 2 (a) and (d), form EPC hotspots with the values of the coupling much higher compared to all other phonon modes. Thus, the total EPC and the critical temperature of NbB strongly depend on the electronic smearing used in the calculation and so cannot be assessed precisely. It is nevertheless interesting that both compounds, despite being quite close in their electronic and vibrational properties, show quite disparate superconducting behavior. The superconducting gap structure is more complex in transition metal borides as compared to alkaline earth metal borides like MgB outer semi-circular sheet around the Γ point, shown in Fig. 2 (c). The orbital character of this electronic sheet is not constant along the sheet because the character changes strongly at the points where the sheet shows indents. Namely, everywhere on this Fermi sheet, except for the indents, the electronic states mainly stem from the d is similar to the states on the inner circular sheet around the Γ point (Fig. 2 (g)). These states from the two circular Fermi sheets form the strongest superconducting gap in NbB (Fig. 2 (b)). All the remaining Fermi sheets together with the indent states of the outer sheet around Γ form the weakest, strongly anisotropic gap. Thus, in NbB from one Fermi sheet contribute to two distinct superconducting gaps. TaB with the same parameters as NbB the Fermi sheets form a single anisotropic gap (Fig. 2 (e) and (f)). unstable phonons, even when calculated with the electronic smearing as low as 0.01 Ha The lightest transition metal of group 5, vanadium, forms a diboride structure without (Fig. 3 (a)). Considering the out-of-plane nature of the unstable mode in both NbB TaB cause rippling of the structure, rendering it dynamically stable. Even though V, Nb and Ta belong to the same group, the Fermi surface of VB compared to the diborides of Nb and Ta. In VB the two sheets around the Γ point have a hexagonal and a ﬂower-like shape respectively, in contrast to almost completely circular sheets in the two other diborides. The hexagonal sheet stems from a combination of out-of-plane d orbitals with considerable contribution of the d orbitals of V without d namely the circular sheet around the M point which corresponds to out-of-plane d orbitals of the M atom (d from the acoustic phonon modes as well as the lowest optical mode representing out-of-plane vibrations of boron atoms, as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Interestingly, the superconducting gap on the Fermi surface shows the opposite pattern for VB 5. The electronic sheets around the Γ point, which are attributed mainly to d the M atom, represent the strongest gap in both NbB in VB the M point. Unlike in the case of Nb and Ta, VB stemming from the ﬂower-shaped Fermi sheet around the Γ point. Thus, VB superconductor. Our calculations show that the gaps vanish at the critical temperature of around 18.5 K. group 3 of the periodic table, on the border between alkaline earth metals and transition metals. Since Sc has only one d electron in its outer shell, other electronic states can contribute more to the electronic states around the Fermi level. Therefore, ScB an intermediate case between CaB The Fermi surface of ScB corresponds to a surface state (Fig. 4 (a)), akin to the one found in alkaline earth metal MBenes such as MgB from Mg/Ca-p states, whereas in ScB (Fig. 2 (h)), it appears that V, being lighter than its group neighbors, does not orbital, whereas the ﬂower-shaped sheet is a mixture of in-plane and out-of-plane d The total electron-phonon coupling for VBis 1.13 with the main contributions coming this state gives rise to the weakest gap. The is true for the circular state around The last material we have considered in more detail was ScB. Scandium belongs to diﬀerent electronic conﬁguration. The states of the outer sheet are a mixture of the boron Anisotropic Eliashberg calculation show that ScB with the strongest gap stemming from the outer Fermi sheet and the weakest gap stemming from the inner sheet. The resulting critical temperature is rather high – around 34.5 K. theory calculations broadly sheds light on the potential of two-dimensional metal boride systems as superconducting materials. High critical temperatures (up to 72 K), as well as multigap superconducting behavior in CaB were shown and detailed in this work. Coupled with the advent of their fabrication [61, 62], here shown diﬀerent electronic structures and Fermi surface conﬁgurations together with the demonstrated richness of the superconducting behavior in 2D metal-borides recommend their versatility for further exploration in fundamental (multi)functional heterostructures as well as potential device applications. Research Funds of the University of Antwerp (TOPBOF), The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) under the contract number COST-118F187, and the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research under award number FA9550-19-1-7048. Computational resources were provided by the High Performance and Grid Computing Center (TRGrid e-Infrastructure) of TUBITAK ULAKBIM and by the VSC (Flemish Supercomputer Center), funded by the FWO and the Flemish Government – department EWI. J.B. is a postdoctoral fellow of the FWO. The collaborative eﬀort in this work was supported by orbital and in-plane d orbitals of Sc. The total isotropic EPC of ScBamounts to 1.27. Our systematic investigation performed with both isotropic and anisotropic Eliashberg This work is supported by Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen), Special the EU COST Action CA16218 NANOCOHYBRI.