 become ever wider and better appreciated, ethical reﬂection on mathematics has remained primitive. We review the somewhat disconnected suggestions of commentators in recent decades with a v ie w to piecing together a coherent approach to ethics in mathematics. Calls for a Hippocratic Oath for mathematicians are examined and it is concluded that while lessons can be learned from the medical profession, the relation of mathematicians to those aﬀected by their work is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. There is something to be learned also from the codes of conduct of cogna te but professionalised quantitative disciplines such as engineering and accountancy, as well as from legal principles bearing on professional work. We conclude with recommendations that professiona l societies in mathematics should sponsor an (international) code of ethics, institutional mission statements for mathematicians and syllabuses for incorpora tion into mathematics degrees. The contrast is stark between the massively ramifying consequences of mathematical work and the paucity of ethical reﬂection on it. It has become almost a platitude that “algorithms are ruling our lives” in areas ranging from social media feeds to healthcare decisions to predicting parolee recidivism. Algorithms honed by mathematicians will drive cars and ﬁght wars. The “wea pons of math destruction” of O’Neil’s popular boo k (2016) are recognised by those outside mathematics to be a major ethical c oncern. Ethical evaluation of them needs to be informed by mathematical expe rtise, since uninformed criticism will miss the mark. The mor e ethically positive uses of mathematics, such as CT scanning, need also to be appreciated, and mathematical technologies with potentially both good and bad use s such as cryptography nee d to be evaluated from a perspec tive of sound technical knowledge combined with ethical insight. on itself and the eﬀects of its work. Cognate quantitative disciplines like engineering and accountancy (and even a subﬁeld of mathematics itself, the actuarial profession) have welldeveloped codes of ethics and enforcement by professional bodies which include ethics in rigorous processes of professional accreditation. The Hipp ocratic Oath in medicine is the best-known of pr ofessional codes, a matter of pride a mong doctors since ancient times as reﬂecting the high impa c t of their work on patients. RWTH Aachen University. dennis.mueller3@rwth-aachen.de . King’s College, University of Cambridge. mcc56@cam.ac.uk . University of New South Wales, Sydney. j.franklin@unsw.edu.au . 2020 AMS Classiﬁcation: 01A80. 00A30. Keywords: Ethics in Mathematics, Hippocratic Oaths, Code of Ethics, Mathematics and Society. Submitted to Science and Engineering Ethics. While the consequences of mathematically-based software, algorithms and strategies have Yet the ma thematical community does not have a solid tradition of ethical reﬂection in other professio ns of high societal impa c t. Although professional societies have developed some codes of conduct for pra c tices internal to the academic profession (such as warning against plagiarism) little has been done about the wider issues of mathematical products that have major eﬀects on society. Calls for wider ethical codes for mathematicians, especially applied mathematicians, a nd calls for a Hippocratic Oath for mathematicians, have been muted, rare and disconnected. been on mathematical applications . In Part II we consider whether a Hippocratic Oath is an appropr iate model for mathematicians. In Part III we explain what can be learned from codes of ethics in cognate quantitative disciplines and from certain basic e thical principles that have been incorpor ated into the law governing products that put users at risk. In our conclusion, we outline speciﬁc steps for the mathematical community to take in order to go beyond c odes of conduct and to establish an enviro nment actively conducive for ethical mathematical practice. These include institutional mission sta tements, integrated ethics courses in the mathematical curriculum and an international code of ethics. mathematicians” are individuals who have a degree or training related to mathematics, and who currently a pply mathematical sk ills and training in their everyday work. matics, which is central to the discipline and has sometimes impeded ethical reﬂection on mathematics. The distinction between pur e and applied mathematics is conceptually and institutionally signiﬁcant. Plainly, it impacts on ethical issues, since ma thematical work applied to extramathematical problems has a far g reater impact on society than research on purely mathematical questions. selves is not the same as the naïve meanings of thos e words. Mathematics is institutionally divided into pure and applied primarily by content, rather than by what it is used for. Pure mathematics is commonly deﬁned as such ﬁelds as number theory, alg e bra, functional analysis, topology/geometry and logic/foundations, as described in the AMS Subject Classiﬁcation (AMS 2020). On the other hand, applied mathematics is taken to consist o f numerical analysis, optimisation, mathematical physics, probability and statistics. That deﬁnition cuts across the naïve meanings of “pure” and “applied”, since, for example, number theory can be used in applications like cryptography while methods of calculation in numerical analysis can be studied for their own sake without r e gard to any uses they may have. An expe rt on a given topic may investigate it as a pure topic at one point in their caree r and apply it at another. relevant. It is, in essence, that we use the labels of pure and applied mathematics as verbs. On any mathematical topic, one can do pure mathematics (with the aim of developing abstract mathematical truth), and one can do applied mathematics (with the aim of solving an e xtra-mathematical pro blem). It is not the ma thematical content that makes the wo rk pure or a pplied, but what it is being done for. less urgent, because its consequences, though occasionally large, are gener ally more remote and unpredictable. Hersh argued that “in pure mathematics, when restricted just to research and not considering the rest of our professional life, the ethical component is very small” (Hersh 1990, 22). When considering codes of ethics later, we will comment brieﬂy on some issues s pecial to pure mathematics. For now we note that the naïve meaning of “pure” and “applied” does not ex e mpt those trained in the traditionally pure ﬁelds from ethical codes, as they must c onstantly reﬂec t on the focus of their mathematical ques tions and what their employer and end-users are doing with the ma thematical results. Mathematicians have be e n, as we will describe below, very slow to follow the lead of those In this article, we survey in Part I the development of what ethical reﬂection there has Fo r the purp oses of this pape r, we will us e the working deﬁnition that “(practicing) We begin however with a brief consideration of the pure/applied distinction in mathe- To complicate matters, the meaning of “pure” and “applied” to mathematicians them- Fr om the ethical perspective, it is the naïve meaning of “pure” and “applied” that is Pure mathematical research is not free of ethical issues, but they are certainly fewer and matics (in the naïve sense), where the impacts are near-term and to some degree foreseeable. Application areas include mathematica l modelling of problems in ﬁelds like climate, logistics and combat, and a range o f mathematical disciplines such as s tatistics applied to real data, ﬁnancial and actuarial mathematics, e pidemiology, cryptog raphy, operations research, quantitative risk, image compression, mathematical ecology and so on. Since the consequences of mathematical conclusions in these ﬁelds are sometimes very large, important ethical issues arise. Early discussions about codes of conduct and oaths for statisticians can already be found during the 1950s. By that time statisticians had been widely employed in a ra nge of applied contexts. From government agencies such as the national census to industrial settings doing quality control, statisticians were constantly challenged in their role. It was o nly natural that discussions about qualitative statistical work and its purposes would be fairly enta ngled with ethical questions in the history of statistics. As a consequence, however, the progres sion of ideas about quality and the nature of the sta tistica l profession have been “nomadic”, jumping between the various sectors where statisticians have been employed (Prévos t 2018). The most prominent example of such a discussion oc c urred in a 1952 special issue of the American Statistician, aptly entitled “Standards of Statistical Conduct in Business and Gover nment” (Statistical Conduct 1952). In this volume, William W.K. Freeman suggested a ﬁrst statistician’s oath, or a set of “principles”: Fr e eman s aw himself as a seeker of truth in a work environment shaped by economic and political forces. His principles hig hlight a general theme encountered in discussions about ethics in mathematics. For many mathematicians, the search for mathematical truth ought to withstand and be independent of external pressures because they consider pure mathematics as a neutr al and value-free truth. Pure mathematicians can then deduce that stricter codes of conduct matter for the applied ﬁelds only. In recent writings on levels of ethical engagement, this stance has been called “level 0: be liev ing there is no ethics in mathematics” (Chiodo and Bursill-Hall 2018, 5). The distinction between the pure and applied becomes even clearer in James Morton’s contribution to the same s pecial issue (Morton 1952, 6-7). Here, he proposed to classify statisticians into three groups: 1. The “theorist” who the author did not consider further as “we need not concern our- 2. the “subject matter specialist” for whom “problems of statistical conduct [...] will 3. and the “fact ﬁnding statistician” for whom “the question of standards of conduct Only two years later, in 1954, Darrell Huﬀ published his now famous b ook How to Lie with Statistics (Huﬀ 1954), which has sold better than any other statistics book in history (Steele 2005). It put the problems surrounding statistical practice into the public sphere and s tatisticians continued to grapple with them. The discussions in the American Statistical Association went on until the 1980 s (Ellenberg 1983), when it published its ﬁrst c ode of conduct (Hurwitz and Gardenier 2012). While constituting a minority by then, some few statisticians still argued against explicitly adopting an ethical commitment. Anderson Most calls for a Hippocratic Oath come from mathematicians working on applied mathe- "Like Euclid and all the other great thinkers who have used symbols to reveal the truths of natur e , I will be a seeker of the truth. Realising that numbers are only a shorthand convention for describing past events and forecasting trends, I will search fo r those facts expressed in numbers which show relationships and events most truly. Though surrounded by the clamour of the marketplace or of the political arena, I will not be a fraud, who selects ﬁgures to prove by chicanery a misnamed conclusion." (Freeman 1 952, 19) selves with his conduct”, seldom become acute”, becomes important both as a morale builder and as a protective device.” neglected the societal boundedness of statistical work, re ducing mora l dilemmas or misconduct to problems of individual ability: “It is often not a matter of statisticians choosing to violate accepted principles of r ight or wrong. They do so out of ignora nce or incompetence” (Anderson 1981, as quoted in Ellenberg 1983). Statistical Society introduced its ﬁrst code of conduct. It requires its members to “act in the public inter e st [...] fulﬁl their obligations to employers and clients [...] to the profession and society [and] at all time show professional competence and integrity” (Royal Statistical Society 1993/2014, 6). Statistics ha d bec ome the next professionalised area of mathematics, including the ethica l commitment characteristic for pr ofessions. Initially a very applied ﬁeld, originally in military operations, it developed pure aspects as problems became studied for their own sake. Discussions about ethics in OR go back to at least the 19 60s, however, even today most of the discussions surrounding ethics ar e restricted to the OR process and not the mathematical models (Wenstøp 2010). In practise, ethics in OR is often still only considere d in an ad-hoc manner (Ormerod and Ulrich 2013). For an overview of recent developments in OR ethics, we also refer to the work of Le Menestrel and van Wassenhove (20 09), but we note her e that Brans (2002) suggested a Hippocratic Oath. In his “Oath of Pro metheus” he considered the diﬀerent roles of OR researcher, teacher, decision-maker and consultant/analyst separately. The oath focuses on a “commitment in favour of fairness, devotion and honesty” and he underscores that “all those taking the oath [...] may be proud of it” (Ibid, 196). Out of it grew the EURO Working Group on Ethics and OR (Brans and Gallo 2004), yet by 2009 only 75 researchers had signed the oath (Gass 2009). This lends weight to an observation we discuss later: an oath alone might not be suﬃcient. of the Cold War, a small gro up of mathematicians a nd scientists started calling for a code of conduct and ethics courses for mathematicians. At a conference in 1988 the American mathematician Chandler Davis asked whether the discipline needed a Hippocra tic Oa th (Davis 1989). Shortly after, Reube n Hersh wrote Mathematics and Ethics, a four-page pape r outlining some thoughts about the ethical respo nsibility of mathematicians (Hersh 1990). He is representative for his collea gues, who often worked alone on such issues and published a few single digit page papers. Their ideas did not ﬁnd much acceptance in the wider mathematical community of the time. Most striking a bout his paper is his need to defend himself for talking about ethics in the ﬁrst place. He began by a ssuring his readership that he was neither going to tell them what to do, nor that he “solved any big problem regarding mathematics and ethics”, but that he had merely “thought about the question, and in the process of thinking about it has had some ideas which he’d like to oﬀer” (Ibid, 20). That it was still rare even in the 1990s to think about ethics in mathematics becomes abundantly clear from James Franklin’s account about developing such a course for his department at the University of New South Wales (imp osed by university policy): well deﬁned codes of conduct and active discussions, and that cryptographers were ﬁghting the US government and its a llies in what has long been ﬁttingly called the “Crypto Wars” o n restrictions about encryption and cryptographic research, the broader mathematical community remained rather silent on the wider issues of ethics in mathematics. There were some exceptions, where individual mathematicians wrote short pieces on ethical iss ues arising in mathematical work and how to teach about these, such as Bonnie Shulman’s paper Is There Enough Poison Gas to Kill the City?: The Teaching of Ethics in Mathematics Classes (Shulman 2002). But most mathematical societies focused their eﬀorts on producing codes of conduct focusing on academic misconduct such as plagiarism and teaching responsibilities. and experienced moments of crises. These ﬁelds would go on to develop their own forms However, in the 1990s many other statistical societies had followed and in 199 3 the Royal The clo sely connected ﬁeld of operations research (OR) traces its origins back to the 1940s. But what were the o ther mathematical sciences doing during this period? At the end “I was approached by a sheepis h Head of School with a message along these lines, ‘We’re no t desperate to ﬁnd someone to create Professional Issues and Ethics in Mathematics; but if you don’t do it, we will be.’ I accepted.” (Franklin 2005, 98) Despite the fact that by the 1990s statisticians and the actuarial profess ion already had In the following years, however, individual subﬁelds of ma thematics came under pressure of Hippocratic Oaths a nd codes of conduct. After the global ﬁnancial crisis of 2007-2008, modern ﬁnancial mathematics had been put into the spotlight. As a consequence, Emanuel Derman a nd Paul Wilmott published the Financial Modeler’s Manifesto (Wilmott and Derman 2009). It contains the following Hippocratic Oath: of Cryptographic Work. At the s ame time, numerous newspaper articles and comments by mathematicians emerged about being employed by intelligence agencies and their work (e.g. Beilinson 2013, Leinster 20 14, Wer theimer 2015, Korman and Tong 2016). By this time, ethica l challenges had appeared in at least six mathematical disciplines: actuarial science, mathematical physics, statistics, operations research, ﬁnancial mathematics, and cryptography. A seventh was about to fo llow with the crisis of algorithms and big data. As the impact of social media and the power of big data became evident, the rese arch into its ethics grew ra pidly. In her 2016 book Weapons of Math Destruction, Cathy O’Neil (201 6) laid out many of the dangers surrounding the use of mathematical technologies. She also argued that data scientists, many of whom have come straight out o f a mathematics degree with very little additional training, ought to have a Hippocratic Oath, even though “a Hippocratic oath alone is insuﬃcient for the task that lies ahead, bec ause at the end of the day data scientists are not corporations” (Upchurch 2018). Since then many codes of conduct and guidelines have been developed in the ﬁelds of data science and artiﬁcial intelligence (Jobin, Ienca, and Vayena 2019). the Cambridge University Ethics in Mathematics Project (2018) were founded. Focused on “teaching responsible be haviour and ethica l awareness to mathematicians”, they hosted the ﬁrst two international conferences on ethics in mathematics (“EiM 1” 2018; “E iM 2” 2019). Other research eﬀorts by mathematicians have followed, putting the focus on the issue of mathematics and social justice (Buell and Shulman 2019), or on the values associated with mathematics (Ernest 2016a, 2016b). However, despite a growing awareness, the idea of ethics in all of mathematics has not yet bee n widely accepted (Chiodo and Clifton 2019). In many places ethical considerations come second and a t times are even considered a burden. Hence, the calls for a Hippocratic Oath for mathematicians persist. The latest goe s back to Hannah Fr y in 2019: It was ar gued by Chiodo and Bursill-Hall that such teaching of ethics to mathematicians must be woven in thr oughout a standard mathematics curriculum, needing to be present not only at all times, but in all individual courses in some way, to normalise ethical considerations and make them an everyday part of mathematica l work (Chiodo and Bursill-Hall 2019). In the ﬁelds of education and philosophy much has been written about the ethics of teaching mathematics and its role at the high school level (e.g. Dubbs 2020), but it remains a desideratum for the mathematical curricula at universities. longest time where X could be an applied subﬁeld enco untering ethical challenges. Few publications have thought about the general issue of ethics in higher mathematics. This relates to the fact that mathematics as a whole, in contr ast to some of its subﬁelds, does not count as a profession. Mathematics is widely applied in industrial settings (Grötschel, Lucas, and Mehrmann 2010) and mathematicians take on various job titles throughout their career, “I will remember that I didn’t make the world, and it doesn’t satisfy my equations. Though I will use models boldly to estimate value, I will not be overly impressed by mathematics. I will never sacriﬁce reality for elegance w ithout e xplaining why I have done so. No r will I give the people who use my model false comfort about its accuracy. Instead, I will make explicit its assumptions and oversights. I understand that my work may have enormous eﬀects on society and the economy, many of them be yond my comprehension.” After the Snowden Leaks in 2013, Phillip Rogaway (2015) published The Moral Character In 2016, the Cambridge University Ethics in Mathematics Society and, shortly thereafter, "We need a Hippocratic oath in the same way it exists for medicine. In medicine, you learn about ethics from day one. In mathematics, it’s a bolt-on at best. It has to be there from day one and at the forefront of your mind in every step you take." (Sample 2 019) As we have seen, ethics in mathematics has been interpreted as “ethics in X” for the including software engineer, statistician, or analyst (SIAM 2017). From the earliest surviving copies of the ancient Hippocratic Oath to today’s widely used version of the World’s Medical Association’s Declaration of Geneva, however, all oaths had in co mmon that they understoo d physic ians as a profession. What they did and are do ing has always been clearly delineated. What can really be said about mathematicians as a group? Would it make sense to have a Hippocratic Oath for Mathematicians? As the starting point for our analysis, we will use the Hippocratic Oa th as re-written by Lasagna in 1964 (Various Physicians Oaths 2016 ), which is currently used by a third o f US medical schools (Crawshaw et al. 2016). Lasagna’s oath is more detailed than the more widely applied version of the World Medical Association’s D eclaration of Geneva (WMA 2021), and thus provides a suitable case study. In r e sponse to Brad Smith a nd Harry Shum (Microsoft 2018), Etzioni (2018) already edited it for the case of artiﬁcial intelligence. However, since mathematics is a broader discipline, encompassing much of artiﬁcial intelligence, we will not use Etzioni’s rewritten version as the s tarting point of our discussion. Otherwise, we are prone to overlook the subtleties special to mathematics and its wider community. Instead, we will go through e ach of the ten sections, a nd analyse if and how Lasagna ’s oath could be adapted to the speciﬁc needs of mathematicians. 1. I swear to fulﬁl, to the best of my ability and judgement, this covenant. At the beginning of their career, and by taking this oath, physicians enter a contractual agreement (“covena nt”) with their peers and their national accreditation body. Neither party to this contract exists in the same for m for mathematics: most mathematical societies do not (yet) give out the accreditation of being a “chartered mathematician” and the mathematical community is comprised of many sub-communities, some of which do not even share the same deg ree title. 2. I will respect the hard-won scientiﬁc gains of those physicians in whose ste ps I walk, and gladly share such knowledge as is mine with those who are to fol low. Almost all mathematical work builds o n the work of others. Thus, this part of the oath could appeal to mathematicians not to ex ploit the mathematical works and developments of others and misuse them in ways that cause harm. Such concerns have already been raised by the mathematician Andrew Wiles, regarding the misuse of mathematical tools leading up to the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis (Devlin 2013). widely. However, given how much of o ur modern society is dependent on mathematical technologies, this instruction might include what computer scientists know as “re sponsible disclosure”. Not all cryptographic results can be immediately published without endang e ring the exis ting critical infrastructure. Responsible disclosure has also been suggested for artiﬁcial intelligence (Hagendorﬀ 2020). The issue of what constitutes the mathematical community still stands. 3. I will apply, for the beneﬁt of the sick, all measures [that] are required, avoidi ng those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism. Despite an increasingly holistic and proactive look at human health, mos t medical work is still concerned with trying to heal the sick. The tools of mathematics, however, are often used to impr ove alrea dy working solutions and are not necess arily about restoration. In addition, mathematicians might take ins piration from the Financial Modeler’s manifesto and interpret (3) as an instruction to use the “right” amount, and type of, mathematics: mathematicians should neither over-model or over-solve a problem, nor give up too easily. Mathematicians ought to share, publish and disseminate their mathematical knowledge 4. I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and that warmth, sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the surgeon’s knife or the chemist’s drug. This could be a reminder to mathematicians to remember their humanity, and that their work should not be applied strictly and rigidly at all times. Applied mathematical work entails non-mathematical decisions, a sking q uestions and understanding when mathematics is not the right tool to responsibly solve the problem. In an age of quantiﬁed decision making, mathematicians are still faced with imprecise assumptions to make and steps to take, which require perspective, experie nce , and humanity. Those aﬀected by mathematical technologies should not be “re duced to a number.” 5. I will not be ashamed to say "I know not," nor will I fail to call in my colleagues w hen the skills of another are needed for a patient’s recovery. Doctors are trained to seek the opinion of other doctors when they feel their medical knowledge is lacking. This is similarly true for mathematicians. However, mo st extra-mathematical problems, situations and scenarios require extensive domain knowledge to be resolved. There may be times when it is necessary to seek help, guidance , and insight not just from other mathematicians, but also from experts in other ﬁelds (Bennett Moses 2018). At the beginning o f the Covid-19 pandemic, mathematicians tried to model the transmissions and spread of Covid in elder ly care homes. However, it has been shown that the modellers underestimated how poor the shielding was between care homes and the wider society, and that they did not ask about it during the modelling phase. No representatives from the care homes were asked for speciﬁc advice, and consequently the models missed the impending outbreaks throughout the care facilities (BBC Two 2020). The interaction with domain experts is of vital importance to succeed and guidelines for responsible modelling should be followed (Chiodo and Müller 2020). 6.a. I will respect the privacy of my patients, for their problems are not di sclosed to me that the world may know. Most especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. Mathematicians s ometimes deal with sensitive issues and conﬁdential data. Mathematical tools such as a lternative credit scoring, for instance, use vast amounts of data and in return can severely impact people’s lives, their decision making, and the choices available to them. To fully respect their autonomy demands that developers respect data privacy and understand that the eﬀects of such data still linger in the trained algorithm lo ng after the initial data has been deleted. It also requires develop e rs to understand mo re complex issues in data justice (for an overview, se e Taylor 2 017 and Dencik et al. 2 019). Mathematicians need to to be aware of how the decision r ules, patterns and associations inferred fr om a data set pertaining to a subset of individuals can still be used to inﬂuence, and possibly e xploit, a larger group, and thus could be a violation of both individual and gr oup privacy (Floridi 2014, Suh et al. 2018). see it as a g ame or even as a competitive sport. Cons ider, for example, the International Mathematical Olympiad which ha s been running annually since 1 959, and its many national counterparts. Examples such as these, however, show that dealing with sensitive data can have real-life co nsequences and substantial impact which the mathematician should rec ognise. 6.b. If it is given to me to save a life, all thanks. But it may also be within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Mathematics ha s the potential to do vast good, but also to do vast har m. However, as is often the case, for mathematics it is less clear than in medicine what constitutes good and It is not uncommon to have initially studied mathematics out o f e njoyment, and to bad. Mathematicians often work in complex environments a nd are faced with competing interests, market and political forces. 6.c. Above all, I mus t not play at God. Predictive algorithms, pricing systems, insurance and many other mathematical systems can impact millions of people. The potential to “play at God” is ever present. It should be understood and avoided. 7. I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous growth, but a sick human being, whose illness may aﬀect the person’s fami ly and economic stability. [. . . ] When mathematicians are asked to solve a societal or industrial problem, they should acknowledge that their mathematics is a means to an end, and not an end in itself. Their work can have an impact on pe ople’s private lives, their economic status and society mo re generally. Broader considerations such as bias, fairness, rights and values must be in the mathematician’s mind, fo r their work not to become “algorithms of oppression” (Noble 2018). However, this point also raises a crucial s ubtlety which we will discuss later: who is a mathematician’s “patient”? How does a ﬁduciary duty, and a duty of care, look for mathematicians, and to whom do they owe it? 8. I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure. This could be viewed as mathematicians acknowledging that preventing problematic outcomes from their work, in advance, is always preferable to Silicon Valley’s mantra of “moving fast and bre aking things” (Levy 2014). 9. I will remember that I remain a member of society, with special obligations to all my fellow human beings, those sound of mind and body as well as the inﬁrm. Mathematicians have all the moral obligations to society that everyo ne else has, and this is not limited to the entity they work for. This ha s a lready been included in codes of ethics for many statistical societies. 10. If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected while I live and remembered with aﬀection thereafter. [ . . . ] The oath could conclude by assuring mathematicians that, by following it, they will live a ha ppy and virtuous life, be remembered well, and be free to enjoy doing mathematics and seeing its positive impact. Mathematicians are very proud of their discipline, demonstrated in the way they name theorems and results. Any ma thematician acting in line with the oath can know that they are leaving a positive legacy. Mathematicians ar e able to trace their educational roots back over 1000 years (Ma thematics Genealog y Project 2021), and unlike in other disciplines, results or ideas are almost never deleted or overwritten. Their output might not receive much attention, but it does get “added to the shelf” for e ver. 2000 years. That has had a deep and lasting impact on the culture of medical practitioners. They know that ethics is important in their ﬁeld, and they swear an oath which was sworn by their teachers, a nd previous generations. In mathematics, there is no such oath. But more than that, the idea of ethical r e sponsibility has not permeated into the disciplinary culture, into the training, or into the mentorship, and the phra se “back in my day we had no such oath” may survive for years to come. Versions of the Hippocratic Oath for medical practitioners have been in existence for over Present in the original Oa th of Hippocrates is the notion to “do no harm” (Various Physicians O aths 2016). This is often interpreted as to only prescribe treatments when the beneﬁts outweigh the risks; harming the body through surgery is allowed in this context. How might mathematicians interpret this when it is not entirely clear what harm actually means? It might be easy for mathematicians to restrict this notion to their employer’s interests, but how should they consider impa c ted parties further aﬁeld? Human Rights issues ar e already being explored in the context of a rtiﬁcial intelligence (Risse 2019), and it must also be put on the agenda for mathematics: How can mathematical work violate human rights, and how can mathematicians take countermeasures? is supplemented by various medical ethics standards, and medical ethics tr aining that is received by almost all medical students. Furthermore, the medical profession is accredited and governed by extensive rules and regulations on what warrants improper conduct. So, in essence, the oath is merely an easy-to-remember reminder of an otherwise deep, complicated and well-suppor ted system. The oath alone, though useful, would probably not achieve all of it. Mathematicians have no such systems. There are remarkably few rules or regulations governing general mathematical work, there is no widely-recognised accreditation process that can be revoked, and there is almost no ethical training oﬀered to mathematicians as part of their degree courses. As even the existence of ethics in mathematics is not yet widely accepted, its co ntent would likely be subjected to extensive challenges. In this section we extract from existing legal/moral principles and from codes of ethics in quantitative ﬁelds some general principles applicable to the ethics of any mathematical work that impacts the public. The long experience o f the legal world and of practical disciplines such as engineering and statistics has resulted in some well-grounded thoug ht on ethical principles. The mathematical community can stand on their s houlders. Irrespective of whether or not a code of ethics for mathematics is desirable, the long-term reﬂection that is distilled in the law and the codes of cognate disciplines has valuable les sons for mathematicians. We begin with the most general principles. sional dealings that impact the public – duty of care. The pr inciple of duty of care is a simple one. A manufac tur e r or provider of services who does something that can be reasonably foreseen to cause harm is liable for that harm. That is so even if the harm is “downstream”, rather than to the party with whom the manufacturer or provider contracted. In one of the ﬁrst cases to establish the principle in American law, MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co. (1916), a driver had been injured by the collapse of the wooden wheel of his Buick, b ought from a dealer. In holding the manufacturer liable, Judge Cardozo said “If to the element of danger there is added knowledge that the thing will be used by persons other than the purchaser, and used without new tests, then, irrespective of contract, the manufacturer of this thing of danger is under a duty to make it carefully.” In the cla ssic British case of the “snail in the bottle,” Donoghue v. Stevenson (1932), where Mrs Donoghue became ill through ing e sting a decomposed snail in the bottle of ginger beer manufactured by Stevenson but sold in a café, Lord Atkin held: While the law of negligence has since become complex on questions such as the degree of remoteness of causality and of foreseeability, and also diﬀers somewhat between jurisdictions, The Hippocratic Oath lacks detail of how a medical practitioner should act. But this The law recognises one very general ethical principle a pplica ble across the board to profes- "You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissio ns which you can reasonably fores e e would be likely to injure your neighbour. Who, then, in law, is my neighbour? The ans wer seems to be – persons who a re so closely and directly aﬀected by my act that I ought reaso nably to have them in contemplation as being so aﬀected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called in questio n." (Dono ghue v Stevenson (1932): 44) the basic principle remains clear. The ethical r e quirement to avoid reasonably forese eable harm caused by the products or services one provides translates into legal liability. mental eﬀects on the public. In particular, a failure to make an eﬀort to foresee eﬀects is not a legally suﬃcient excuse for not foreseeing eﬀects that are, as a matter of objective fact, reasonably foreseeable. professions, a near-equivalent idea appears in so me codes under the name “the public interest”. T hat concept refers to both harmful and beneﬁcial eﬀects of work on the wider public. Fo r example, the Royal Statistical Society puts ﬁrst among its principles: interest, which it ﬁlls out with: Engineers Australia (2019) adv ises: duty o f care, which is more narrowly concer ned with avoidance of ha rm. Nevertheless, both concepts relate to the ethical re quirement to take into account signiﬁcantly and primarily the interests of all “stakeholders” who are reasonably foreseen to be aﬀected by work, not just the interests of the contracting parties who commission and perform the work. codes of ethics and codes of conduct, even though tha t distinction is not clearly made in the names of existing professio nal codes. A code of ethics is the broader concept. I t includes principles applicable to all the ethical as pects of a professional’s work, including its re lation to the public interest. A code of conduct, on the other hand, restricts itself to the personal behaviour of a professional in the ﬁeld, enjoining such virtues as honesty, competence, respe c t between professionals and ensuring work does not bring the profession into disrepute. In this terminology, the Royal Statistical Society’s code, though called a code of conduct, is broad enough to be a code of ethics. But the codes of the Americ an Mathematical Society, the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, and the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, are codes of conduct. est, since there is no ethical point in behaving with honesty, integrity and competence on a project that is itself harmful. Nevertheless, they are crucial for working ethically in a profession, a nd several codes have expressed req uirements such as honesty/integrity, competence, avoiding conﬂict of interest, engaging/communicating, and attending to data issues: Honesty/integrity: Professionals should state truly the facts, about such matters as what is revealed by their wo rk, their own co mpetence and qualiﬁcations, foreseen impa c ts of the work, corre c t attribution of work, and the likelihood of contracted work being able to reach credible co nclus ions. As the SIAM code puts it, “act with integrity, and strive to be objective, unbiased, and truthful in all aspects of our work.” (SIAM n.d.) That applies directly to the pr oducts supplied by mathematicians that could have detri- While the language o f “duty of care” is not found in codes of ethics of the quantitative • "Fellows should always be aware o f their overriding responsibility to the public good; including public health, safety and environment." • "A Fellow’s obligations to e mployers, clients and the profession c an never override this [...]" • "Fellows shall in their professional practice have regard to basic human rights and shall avoid any actions that adversely aﬀect such rights." (Royal Statistical Society 1993/2014) The Australian Computer Society Code (2014 ) also starts with the primacy of the public • "identify those potentially impacted by your work and explicitly c onsider their interests" (similar in Institute of Mathematics and its Applications 2018). • "Practise engineering to foster the health, safety and wellbeing of the community and the environment [...] incorporate social, cultural, health, safety, environmental and economic considerations into the engineering task. [...] Balance the needs of the present with the needs of future generations" Those comments on the public interes t are more positive in tone than the legal concept of Before considering some other principles found in codes, it is useful to distinguish between These issues of professional conduct are secondary to those involving the public inter- Competence/diligence: The work of any pr ofessional should be performed with c ompetence and dilige nce . “Fellows shall carry out work w ith due care and diligence in accordance with the requirements of the employer or client,” says the Royal Statistical Soc iety (1993/ 2014, 2). But high standards are expected espec ially of mathematicians. Mathematics holds out the prospect of absolutely certain, proven re sults. The public trusts that. Where results are provable, they should be proved, and where that is impossible, they should be to the highest standar ds. Competence includes updating one’s professional knowledge with new developments, consulting domain experts and knowing the applicable law. Conﬂict of interest: Where a professional has or is reasonably perceived to have a conﬂict between the interests of the client or public and those of him/herself or his “kin” (such as family, students or colleagues), the conﬂict must be appropriately managed. That could mean appropriate disclosure or recusing oneself from decision-making. If the conﬂict is severe, it could mean refusing work. The Australian Computer Society advises: The Actuaries Code states: Engaging/communicating: Professiona l work is a shared enterprise , so it requires engaging and communicating with all aﬀected stakeholders. The client has a right and duty to communicate fully what it wants do ne and the relevant information for doing it. Other stakeholders such as those aﬀected by the implementation o f an alg orithm should be surveyed as well as having their interests g uessed at. The nature of multidisciplinary work means tha t mathematical skills by themselves are rarely suﬃcient for a task, so mathematicians must recognise where their expertise ends and seek out those with the necessar y complementary skills. For example, an algorithm to be implemented in software for public use will need exp ertise in human-computer interaction to ensure its usability and safety. essary require ments of conﬁdentiality. The American Mathematical Society states venient to a client’s interests might need to be disclosed if they indicate a danger to the public. (McGoey and Jackson 2009) Data issues: Much of applied mathematical work is based on or at least takes into account quantita tive data, for which special issues arise. The data itself must be ethically collected, with consent where appr opriate. Mathematicians must be aware of, and a dv ise clients and the public of, the s uﬃciency of the data for the claims based on it and the need to guard against biases in it. The Oxford-Munich Code for Professional Data Scientists (Grindrod and Moreno 2018) lists a number of special issues arising in making inferences from data reliably and ethically, including: • "[to] raise with stakeholders any potential conﬂicts between your professional activity and legal or other accepted public requirements" • "[to] a dvise your stakeholders as soon as possible of any conﬂicts of interest or conscientious objections that you have" (ACS 2014) • "Member s must ensure that their professional judgement is not compromised, and ca nnot reasonably be seen to be compromised, by bias, co nﬂict of interest, or the undue inﬂuence of others." • "Member s must take reasonable steps to ensure that they are aware of a ny relevant interests that might create a conﬂict." • "Member s must not act where there is an unreconciled conﬂict of interest. (Institute and Faculty of Actuaries 2019)" Information on results should be disseminated as freely as possible, subject to any nec- • “Freedom to publish must sometimes yield to security concerns, but mathematicians should resist excessive secrecy demands whether by government or private institutions.” (AMS 2005/2019) Fo r example, the results of an aborted or suppresse d statistical trial which proves incon- While these are in the ﬁrst instances technical issues about inference from data, it is the exp ert knowledge of them held by mathematicians, statisticians and data scientists that gives them a cognitive advantage over clients and users, and hence a responsibility to act competently and honestly. It would certainly be possible to construct a code of ethics for mathematicians, adapting recognised principles from the existing codes of ethics, Hippocratic oaths and adding some advice on detailed issues that are special to mathematics. Is that a useful exercise? unlikely to soon become, fully professionalised like medicine, law and the actuarial profession, with accreditatio n and a powerful professional association capable of dis c iplining members. tury. In the UK the origins of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries (IFoA) goes back to a Royal Charter in 1848 (Privy Council 2021), and it still works as the only institution to both represent and reg ulate actuaries in the UK (IFoA n.d.). Their work surrounding accreditation a nd regulation is highly eﬀective. Similarly, statisticians have undergone a professionalisation with accreditation mechanisms. The Royal Statistical Society has existed with Royal Charter in the UK since 1887 (Privy Council 2021). It accredits a nd governs the actions of professional statisticians in the UK following an extensive code of conduct, and their work further combats various misuses of statistics in society, such as in the case of Sally Clark (Nobles and Schiﬀ 2005). But as we have seen, for mathematicians the situation is much more complicated. Even the labelling of mathematicians as mathematicians is problematic, with many graduates in mathematics later identifying as software engineers or computer scientists, sometimes w ithout further professional training. It may therefore be unclear who such a code would apply to. problems: existing oaths for physicians rely on there being a well-deﬁned patient, and a common understanding of “goo d” and “harm”. In medicine, as in the other classical professions like law and the clergy, a well-deﬁned client has a relationship of pers onal encounter with the professional, who has explicitly agreed to act in the client’s interest. (Koehn, 19 94, ch. 1, Franklin, 2011); that personal relationship structures the professional ethics of the relationship. For mathematicians (as for eng ineers and computer scientists), we cannot simply deﬁne a patient, but have to consider a variety of stakeholders in a ddition to the party employing the mathematician: those using the techno logy (e.g. the users of a search engine), the customers of the company (e.g. companies buying ad space on social media), their employer and the various funding sources, and other impacted parties (e.g. those being advertised/sold to). within the individual groups. Recent research has shown that even considerations such as fairness and bias are often interpreted with diﬀerent and competing notions and results: individual fairness does not necessarily imply or contradict group fairness, nor vice versa (Binns 2020). Mathematics ampliﬁes the reach of technologies and the situation complexiﬁes quickly, and those impacted by it can lie in the thousands if not millions. Here lessons could • "The Data Scientist is responsible for assessing the adequacy of data to solve the particular problem and to share the results of the analysis, indicating any risks o r potential implications due to lack of data quality or availability." • "The Data Scientist is res ponsible for separa ting correlations that are the results of chance or deliberate data-mining driven sea rches vs. well established hypothesis-driven correlated information." • "The Data Scientist shall retain copies of the origina l data unaltered." • "The Data Scientist shall not apply any technique (combination, enriching, etc) to turn information that has been designed to be “de-identiﬁable” into “identiﬁable” again" It is true that such a code would not (yet) be enforceable. Mathematics is not, and is The institutionalised actuarial community traces its origins back to the nineteenth cen- Furthermore, our analysis of Lasagna’s Hippocra tic Oath has introduced two additional Mathematicians are constantly confronted with tr ade-oﬀs between the stakeholders and be taken from existing codes for statisticians and the Oxford-Munich Code for Data Science as both communities deal with similar issues. mathematicians, a physician can usually see the patient and inquire with them to gain a better understanding. Mathematica l work usually aﬀects many individuals and groups far away from and unseen by the mathematician, and often in ways that the mathematician might never see nor experience ﬁrst hand. Complex mathematical systems lack feedback mechanisms, of the kind that exist in a doctor-patient relationship, and are diﬃcult to chang e if mistakes were made. Questions of consent and accountability are already highly debated issues in artiﬁcial intelligence and the wider ﬁeld of ethics of algorithms. All their challenges remain: Can users object and withdraw consent in the same way a physician’s patient could? Do alternative technologies exist and what are the opportunity costs as sociated with them? Who should be held accountable if things go wrong, and what are the best ways to establish accountability? in litigation. Computer scientists, who face the same problem of a non-professionalised and diversiﬁed discipline, have found some value in a code. The Australian Computer Society comments, under “rele vance to law”: “This Code of Professional Conduct ha s relevance to professional standards legislation. Failure to abide by the Code could be used as grounds for a claim of professional negligence. The Code may be quoted by an expert witness giving an assessment of profess ional conduct.” (ACS 2014, 4) So one point o f a code is that no-one can then say in court “We ll, no-one told me I was supposed to be ethical, or what that would mean.” If the law inquires whether a mathematician has bre ached a duty of car e by causing foreseeable harm, a code could add ﬂesh to that gener al principle. For it to be eﬀective, however, requires its authors to engage with the previously mentioned challenges. applications. While a clinica l patient is usually ﬁghting a disease or ailment and the physician assists in that ﬁght, mathematicians are not necessarily ﬁghting something generally agreed upon as “bad”. Often, problems and moral questions in mathematical work only become obvious after implementation. Few had thoug ht about the role of mathematics in targeted political a dvertising before the case of Cambridge Analytica, in which the personal data of millions of Fac ebook users were harvested without their consent (Chan 2019). Arguably, much of modern mathematical research has worked for the beneﬁt of society, but the problems practitioners deal with are so complex that when challenges do occur, the stakes are high. Then mathematicians have to weigh up diﬀerent notions of “good” and “harm”: public, individual, environmental, or c orporate – as do the alrea dy existing codes studied above. research, which is more co mparable to philosophy a nd art than to engineering. Both philosophy and art bring their own set of ethica l challenges, which we have no t further considered in this paper. We will, however, brieﬂy need to mention the opportunity cost of pure mathematics and talk about mathematical education before moving on. Is it justiﬁed to have such a propo rtion of very talented and highly tr ained people devoting their lives to proving theorems when they could be doing s omething more ethically positive, like medical res earch? (Franklin 1991) Others argue that pure mathematics must be able to justify itself as a pr ime expression of the human spirit or essential to huma n ﬂourishing. (Su 2020). Beyond that, ethical issues arise from the domination of ma thematical pedagogy by pure mathematics and the usual internal issues for any profession, such as fairness in hiring and correct attribution of work – issues laid out in the American Mathematical So c ie ty’s Code of Ethics. (AMS 2005/2019) It r emains an open question if and how a code of ethics for mathematicians should address these issues. and an eﬀective middle-ground could be institutional mission statements. It has been proposed that individual mathematicians come up with pe rsonal missio n statements (Harris and Vega 2020), but this approach might be too limited in reach and s hould be expanded. Individual univer sities, departments and other employers might introduce or expand their mission statements to go beyond teaching, inclusivity and diversity. These can be ta ilored A further diﬃculty arises in the proximity and abstraction of impacted parties. Unlike Codes and oaths partially take their value from being a source of reference, for example Furthermore, the notions of “good” and “harm” are muddied for many mathematical Finally, any successful code of ethics must also address the iss ues of pure mathematical Reaching consensus on a code of ethics for all mathematicians could take a long time, to the particular circumstances of the institution and its surroundings, taking into account the relevant cultural and social needs. Such statements might not b e universally applicable, but they are quicker to develop, implement, a nd evolve. Furthermore, they could be tied to existing institutional structures, making it easier to implement tools of accountability and enforcement mechanisms. But most importantly, they would address a concer n commonly heard in the context of ethics in mathematics: “Whose ethics?” Those of the p eople within the institution. With time, mission statements could feed into and provide inspiration for codes of ethics for national and international mathematical societies. about human values and codes of ethics. The interviews suggest that a bottom-up approach for codes o f ethics could be most promising , as it seems to be supported by modellers and has the p otential to include multiple stakeholders and regional values. To o ur under standing, no similar study has been undertaken for mathematicians, but we suggest that a bottom-up approach using mission statements would be eﬀective, and could provide a suitable space for minorities to be heard. For mission sta tements to be successful, they need to build on a se t of informed, diverse and repre sentative contributors, including tho se currently ins titutionally underrepresented. We have seen that the development of ethics in the mathematics community remains in a primitive state, at the sa me time as the impa c t of mathematical technologies on society has reached an all- time high. We have also seen that there is much to learn from how cognate quantitative disciplines have approached their ethical responsibilities, as well as from general lega l a nd moral principles. In the light of that, we make several recommendations, ordered not by their perceived importance, but instead by how we believe they might be most eﬀectively a nd rapidly implemented. maticians, should draw up or modify their own small-scale mission statements to spe c iﬁcally include references to ethical cons iderations of the ma thematical work relating to their activities. These can be done quickly, and can evolve in time. courses on pro fessional issues and ethics in all accredited ma thematics deg rees, and the incorporation of ethical awareness and training into all mathematics teaching, courses and modules. They should sponsor the development of syllabuses for such courses, with internationally common core content but with variations for local conditions and allowing for advice from industry practitioners. laborate to sponsor wo rk towards an international code of ethics for working mathematicians. It should g o beyond a mere code of conduct for the internal workings o f the academic mathematics profession, but instead foreground the primacy of the public interes t. It should distinguish between the ethics applicable to pure and applied wor k. The code w hen ﬁnalised should become an oﬃcial policy document of each society. allegations of unethical professional behaviour by mathematicians can be referred for investigation. If allegations are found to be proved, an oﬃcial statement by the society should make public the re sults of the investigation. Despite not carrying any legal standing, they may still deter unethical practise among mathematicians thro ugh g e neral community awareness. While the develo pment of mission statements, courses, and codes of ethics is crucial, it is eventually needed to go beyond passive documents, and to create an environment actively conducive to ethical mathematical practise. to let the perfect be the enemy of the good, while they are waiting for a perfect universal solution to be implemented. However, choosing to do nothing is still a choice, and is probably far from an ideal solution. Fleischmann, Hui and Wallace (2017) conducted interviews with computational modellers Firstly, individual institutions, such as universities and companies employing mathe- Secondly, the professional societies should encourage both the inclusion of standalone Thirdly, the mathematical societies, in bo th pure and applied mathematics, should col- And ﬁnally, the professional societies should institute c omplaints procedures to which We ﬁnish by acknowledging that some in the mathematical community might be tempted