A preliminary version of this paper appeared in: educational forums with heterogeneous student population. Rohith Dwarakanath Vallam, Priyanka Bhatt, Debmalya Mandal, and Y. Narahari. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2015, Austin, Texas, USA. Rohith Dwarakanath Vallam, Priyanka Bhatt, Debmalya Mandal, and Y Narahari rohithdv@gmail.com,priyankabhatt91@gmail.com,dmandal@g.harvard.edu, With the rapid proliferation of the Internet, the area of education has undergone a massive transformation in terms of how students and instructors interact in a classroom. Online learning environments now constitute a very important part of any academic course. Online learning now takes more than one form, including the use of technology to enhance a face-to-face class, a hybrid class that combines both face-to-face meetings and online work, and fully online courses (popularly known as massive open online courses or MOOCs). Further, online classrooms are usually composed of an online education forum (OEF) where students and instructor discuss open-ended questions for gaining better understanding of the subject. However, empirical studies have repeatedly shown that the dropout rates in these online courses are very high partly due to the lack of motivation among the enrolled students. The objective of our work is to come up with an appropriate analytical model for OEFs and use this model to design an effective incentive-based game to enhance student-instructor participation in these OEFs considering for heterogeneity in the skills among the students as well as the limited budget of the instructor. We ﬁrst undertake an empirical comparison of student behavior in OEFs associated with a graduatelevel course offered in the Indian Institute of Science during two terms. We identify key parameters dictating the dynamics of OEFs like effective incentive design, student heterogeneity, and superposters phenomenon. Motivated by empirical observations, we propose an analytical model based on continuous time Markov chains (CTMCs) to capture instructor-student interactions in an OEF. Using concepts from lumpability of CTMCs, we compute steady state and transient probabilities along with expected net-rewards for the instructor and the students. We formulate a mixed-integer linear program which views an OEF as a single-leader-multiple-followers Stackelberg game. Through simulations, we observe that students exhibit varied degree of non-monotonicity in their participation (with increasing instructor involvement). We also study the effect of instructor bias and budget on the student participation levels. Our model exhibits the empirically observed super-poster phenomenon under certain parameter conﬁgurations and recommends an optimal plan to the instructor for maximizing student participation in OEFs. With the rapid proliferation of the Internet, the area of education has undergone a massive transformation in terms of how students and instructors interact in a classroom. Online learning environments now constitute a very important part of any academic course. Online learning now takes more than one form, including the use of technology to enhance a face-to-face class, a hybrid class that combines both face-to-face meetings and online work (which is typical of courses in many universities today), and online courses (popularly known as massive open online courses or MOOCs). Broadly, any academic course may thus be modelled in three ways: the traditional face-to-face model, an online model and the hybrid model constituting both face-to-face interactions as well as online interactions between students and the instructor. Traditional face-to-face classrooms are identiﬁed by an instructor who is conducting the course and students enrolled to the course. Periodic lectures, tests and assignments require the physical presence of the students and the instructor in the classroom at some ﬁxed timings. Hybrid and online classrooms offer a great deal of ﬂexibility in conducting the class which was not possible in the pre-Internet era. One of the forms of online education that has garnered active interest of researchers due to their immense popularity are the massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered by MOOC platforms like Coursera, edX, Udacity, etc. As of January 19, 2017, Coursera [Coursera, 2017] had about 23 million enrollments from students representing 190 countries. Further, Coursera students (as of January 2014) voiced themselves in 590,000 discussion threads in the education forums for a total of 343,014,912 minutes of learning across 571 courses [Butean et al., 2015]. A recent US Department of Education report [Means et al., 2009] made some key observations regarding effectiveness of online learning namely: • The efﬁcacy of online classrooms varies across different courses as well as heterogeneous skills of students. Many hybrid and online courses typically have an online discussion forum (also known as online education forum (OEF)[Ghosh and Kleinberg, 2013]) wherein students with heterogeneous skills can interact with each other as well as the instructor and discuss a variety of questions related to the subject. Such environments offer a great deal of promise for education as well as pose a number of challenges. Surveys of student perceptions about online threaded discussions have shown tremendous positive interest among the students to access these OEFs as an effective way for acquisition of knowledge ([Pendry and Salvatore, 2015],[Martyn, 2003]). Studies in this area have concluded that developing an actively participating learning community along with the instructor participating as an equal member is the vehicle through which online education is best delivered [Palloff and Pratt, 2007]. An important part of such hybrid and online educational environments are OEFs which aim at ﬁlling the ‘physical’ connect missing in these online platforms. Students and the instructor use these forums in order to interact and discuss various topics related to the course and otherwise, which helps in improving the understanding of the students [Andresen, 2009]. It is also noted that participation in OEFs provides opportunities for responsibility and active learning through the expectation of regular participation in online discussions [Hopperton, 1998]. This is not a scenario for a few prepared students to respond to a lecturer while the rest of the class sits back. Participation in the OEF demands that students become actively engaged with the course content and through the interaction with their peers, negotiate the meanings of the content. They construct knowledge through the shared experiences that each participant brings to the collaborative discussions [Markel, 2001]. Thus, the primary objective of online classrooms is to enhance learning by stimulating active discussions on their OEFs and this is determined by the extent of student participations in these OEFs. In this work, we are addressing the problem of improving student participation in the OEFs . In particular, we quantify student participation in OEFs by measuring the number of answers given by enrolled students (with heterogeneous skills) to a number of open-ended questions posted by the instructor on these OEFs. Recent approaches to this problem have focused on an incentive-based approach for improving participation in OEFs [Ghosh and Kleinberg, 2013] and Q&A forums like Yahoo! Answers, Stackoverﬂow, WikiAnswers, etc ([Ghosh and McAfee, 2012],[Ghosh and Hummel, 2012],[Sakurai et al., 2013]). In this work, we adopt a game-theoretic approach to address the issue of improving participation levels among students (with heterogeneous skills) in an OEF. We incentivize students on a per question basis to keep up the momentum of participation in the class. Students are required to post answers to the speciﬁc open-ended/discussion-style questions that are posted on the OEF. These questions have the characteristic that they do not have a well-deﬁned answer and hence necessitate multiple viewpoints/opinions. Students are thus incentivized to post answers to such questions even if other classmates have already posted their answers resulting in increased student participation and better understanding Students taking online courses performed better, on an average, than those taking the same course in a traditional face-to-face environment. Hybrid courses having both an online instruction as well as face-to-face elements had a larger advantage relative to purely face-to-face instruction than did purely online instruction. of the course content. In practice, these incentives could manifest in the form of book vouchers, food coupons or some extra grade points, as considered appropriate by the instructor. Before we get into the details of our approach, we brieﬂy discuss various properties of online classrooms as well as some important issues faced by online education forums (OEFs) in particular. We follow this with a review of some relevant game theoretic literature in this area. 2.1 OEFs, Instructor Participation, and Open-Ended Questions Numerous studies indicate that OEFs are instrumental in online classrooms for the construction of knowledge and for improving the understanding of the enrolled students. Andresen [Andresen, 2009] and Mazzolini et.al. [Mazzolini and Maddison, 2003] emphasize the critical role of discussion forums and optimal instructor participation in improving the effectiveness of online learning. Breslow et. al [Breslow et al., 2013] observe the data of participation patterns of students in a MOOC offered by edX and their study indicates that the discussion forums. Williams et. al [Williams et al., 2014] and Ballou [Ballou, 2008] emphasize that open-ended questions help building a rapport among the participants and also improve their understanding. Also, an experimental study by Hull et.al [Hull and Saxon, 2009] suggests that open-ended questions and controlled instructor participation on the OEFs has positive effects on the learning of students. Students participating in MOOCs have been classiﬁed in the literature based on various criteria. DeBoer et.al.[DeBoer et al., 2013] identiﬁed that students enrolled for MOOCs differ based on geographical locations, educational backgrounds and age groups. Kizilcec et. al [Kizilcec et al., 2013] observe that there are typically four types of students in online courses based on their level of commitment to the course namely: ‘Completing’, ‘Auditing’, ‘Disengaging’, and ‘Sampling’. Wilkowski et. al [Wilkowski et al., 2014] note that there are about four main categories of students namely: ‘No-shows’, ‘Observers’, ‘Casual Learners’, and ‘Completers’, classiﬁed based on their objective of joining the online classroom. Figure 1: This ﬁgure shows a classroom and two sample ways in which the students in a class can be categorized: All students are different essentially and so each student belongs to a different type. properties more similar to each other but different from the rest are put together in one type. (Image Courtesy: BYU Animation) One of the primary objectives of our work is to model such heterogeneity among the student population by categorizing the students into or the quality of answers given by the students, etc. The classiﬁcation of students into different types (Figure 1) can be as ﬁne as each student belonging to a different type, or as coarse as all students belonging to a single type. This can depend on the size of the class, for example, in a small class each student can be considered as belonging to a different type whereas in a larger class similar students can be grouped together into one type to reduce the number of types. This grouping is essential in large classrooms (of the scale of online classrooms) as giving personal attention to each student is a humongous task for the instructor and it is easier for the instructor to focus based on grouping of the students. Ltypes according to some suitable criteria, for example, the expertise of a student in the related areas Online classrooms witness massive enrollments but their retention rate is very dismal with around ﬁnishing the course [Fowler, 2013]. Halawa et. al [Halawa et al., 2014], and Cheng et. al [Cheng et al., 2013] claim that a timely intervention by the instructor might help decreasing the dropout rates in the online classrooms and so design predictors and tools which will assist the instructor in identifying the students at a high risk of dropping out. The instructor of an online course might encounter distinct types of individuals in the OEFs and her objective is to maximize participation from each of them whereas the students’ objective is to maximize rewards received (if any) and minimize the cost incurred towards answering questions on the forum. The proposed model thus introduces incentives in the form of some socio-psychological rewards or some physical rewards that are offered to the students on answering a question. The socio-psychological rewards are in the form of satisfaction of the students on getting recognition from the instructor in the classroom and also that the instructor is reading their ‘good’ answers (we assume that there are teaching assistants for the course who allow only a good quality answer to be posted). On the other hand, physical rewards may be in the form of some book vouchers or food coupons etc. that the instructor can provide to the students. An important point to note is that both types of rewards can be awarded only on a limited scale as the instructor can read or reward only some limited number of answers to a question. This real-world limitation drives us to consider a budgeted rewarding scheme which ensures that the instructor has a limited budget rewards to the students. Brafman et.al. [Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1996] analyze partially controlled multi-agent systems and in this context, the authors consider the scenario of a two-agent system consisting of a teacher and a student. The work assumes the teacher is a knowledgeable agent, while the student is an agent that is learning how to behave in its domain. Their goal is to utilize the teacher (which is under our control) to improve the behavior of the student (which is not controlled by us). Our work is similar in philosophy to the above work in that we are proposing an optimal plan to instructor (or teacher) to improve student behaviour in online educational forums. However, we consider solving the problem through designing of optimal incentive scheme in the presence of a budgeted instructor. Also, we customize the behaviour of the instructor taking into account the presence of students with heterogeneous skills. Fave et.al [Delle Fave et al., 2014] propose a Stackelberg game theoretic model to handle execution uncertainty in the security patrolling domain. They come up with equilibrium strategies for attacker and defenders and perform extensive experiments which implements the proposed model. Our work also models a Stackelberg game but in the domain of education. Our work models an educational forum involving instructor and students in an online course and captures heterogeneity in the skills of the students through a Continuous time Markov Chain model for the online educational forum. Further, the parameters of the CTMC are optimized by viewing the classroom activities as a Stackelberg game model among the instructor and students. Equilibrium strategies are computed which provide an optimal plan to the instructor for maximizing student engagement in an online course. Ghalme et.al [Ghalme et al., 2018] consider the problem of designing a robust credit score function in the context of online discussion forums. They design coalition resistant credit score functions for online discussion forums. They show that modularity is coalition identifying and provide theoretical guarantees on modularity based credit score function. Carbonara et.al [Carbonara et al., 2015] model the problem of strategic auditing in peer grading modeling the student’s choice of effort in response to a grader’s audit levels as a Stackelberg game with multiple followers. In this theoretical analysis, a homogeneous student population is considered and provide a polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) in order to compute an approximate solution to the problem of allocating audit levels. Game theoretic literature that relates to online learning and discussion forums mostly concentrates on designing incentives for Q&A forums like Yahoo! Answers, Stackoverﬂow, WikiAnswers etc. Ghosh et.al [Ghosh and McAfee, 2012] study about two types of rewards, attention rewards and ﬁxed-total rewards, and how they should be set in order to achieve good quality outcomes from the crowd in an online forum. Sakurai et. al [Sakurai et al., 2013] make the agents indirectly report their efforts and allocate rewards such that agents have to be truthful and have to put in more efforts in order to receive higher rewards. Ghosh et.al [Ghosh and Hummel, 2012] investigate two settings, one in which a contribution’s value depends upon an agent’s expertise only, and the other in which a contribution’s value depends upon both the expertise of the agent and the effort put in by her. They show that optimal outcomes can be implemented in the ﬁrst case, whereas in the second case, optimal outcomes can be implemented only if the ranking of the contributions is noisy. Ghosh et.al [Ghosh and Kleinberg, 2013] focus on online forums for education which is closer to our work. They allow the students and the instructor to choose their rates of arrival in order to maximize their utility. Each type of arrival is modeled as a Poisson process and then analysis on the relationship between the students’ rate of arrival and the instructor’s rate of arrival is done for two types of questions: single-answer type and open-ended type. They are able to show that the students rate of participation varies non-monotonically with the instructor’s rate of response to questions, as is generally observed. That is, the students’ rate of participation initially increases as the rate of arrival of the instructor increases and then as the instructor’s rate increases beyond a threshold, their rates start dropping until they stop participating. Some key assumptions in Ghosh et.al [Ghosh and Kleinberg, 2013] are homogeneous student population and unlimited number of rewards given to the students, which are very unrealistic in practical settings. Our model generalizes their model in the following aspects: (a) Heterogeneity of student population: we consider a realistic model where students possess heterogeneous skill levels. (b) Budgeted Rewards: the instructor has a limited budget to award students who are participating in the OEF. The analysis in Ghosh and Kleinberg 2013 assumes that all students are similar and this special case can be handled in our model by assuming that all the students belong to the same type. We list the main contributions of this work below: The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss the empirical analysis of a real-world online education forum in Section 4. We analytically model the activities of an online education forum (OEF) using a CTMC in Section 5. Lumpability of this CTMC is discussed in Section 6. A Stackelberg game formulation is provided in Section 7. Simulation results are discussed in Section 8. We ﬁnally conclude in Section 9 and discuss possible avenues of future work in Section 10. The proofs for all results are provided in the appendix. We perform empirical analysis of a real-world online education forum by investigating the participation levels of students in the Game Theory course (E1 254) offered in the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore during Jan-April, 2014. We design incentives to promote better participation in the online Piazza [Piazza, 2017] forum associated with the course. We account for the heterogeneity among the students of the class through various parameters and study the improvement in participation levels in this course compared to the same course offered two years ago where no such incentives for participation were offered. We devise a recipe for the instructor in an online course to increase student participation in OEFs. To achieve this goal, we propose a mixed integer linear program (MILP) framework to recommend an optimal plan to the instructor for maximizing student participation in OEFs. We approach this objective through the following intermediate steps: (a)Motivated by the empirical study of the online classroom, we ﬁrst analytically model the activities of an online education forum (OEF) in which there is a course instructor and students with heterogeneous skill levels. In order to promote a higher level of participation by the students in the forum, the instructor periodically posts open-ended (discussion type) questions pertaining to the course in the forum. We propose a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC) to model the non-strategic (i.e. when the rates of arrival of the students and the instructor to the forum are known) student-instructor interactions in an OEF. We model the cost-beneﬁt trade-offs of the students for participating in the forum as well as the limited budget of the instructor by deﬁning corresponding reward functions on the CTMC. (b)Using ideas from lumpability of Markov chains, we simplify the CTMC into simpler, student-speciﬁc lumped CTMCs. We then compute the steady state and the transient probability distributions of the lumped CTMCs and evaluate the expected net rewards to the instructor and students. (c)We then formulate a strategic-OEF setting where both the instructor and the students have a set of possible rates of arrival to choose from and each of them will choose an arrival rate in order to maximize their respective (transient/steady state) utilities. Using a Stackelberg game formulation, we propose a bi-level optimization problem between the instructor and the students in the form of a mixed integer quadratic program (MIQP) which we convert to a mixed integer linear program (MILP) using an approach similar to the analysis done for the Bayesian Stackelberg setting by Parachuri et.al 2008. (d)We undertake detailed simulations and develop new insights into the activities of OEFs. We observe that the students exhibit varied degree of non-monotonicity (with increasing instructor rate) in their participation. We also study the effect of instructor bias and budget on the student participation levels. Our model exhibits the empirically observed super-poster phenomenon under certain parameter conﬁgurations and recommends an optimal plan to the instructor for maximizing student participation in OEFs. We conducted an experiment using the Piazza [Piazza, 2017] education forum to study the effect of incentives on improving participation in the online classrooms. As part of this experiment, we created user accounts on Piazza for the students, instructors and teaching assistants of the ongoing ofﬂine course on Game Theory (E1 254) in the Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, in Spring 2014. An explicit incentive system was formulated where participation on forum was rewarded with points. These points could in turn be encashed as an increase of upto the incentives offered are given in Figure 2(a). In order to further incentivize participation, we also organized polls every few weeks on the 2014 OEF to choose the students who were actively posting questions and answers on the forum. The winners of these polls as well as the students who voted for the winners were given some additional reward points. We compared the participation levels we achieved in this forum with data obtained from the OEF for the same course in Spring 2012 at the Indian Institute of Science wherein there was no such incentive designed for improving participation. Figure 2: Figures 2(a) to (b) correspond to empirical observations in the Piazza forums of the Game Theory Course for two terms (2012 and 2014) held at the Department of CSA, IISc. Note that the y axis labels in the bar graphs in this ﬁgure correspond to “Number of Answers posted on the Piazza forum". We put forth some of the key observations from our study of the OEFs from these two courses. 5%in the marks awarded in the ofﬂine course of Game Theory. The details of the OEF statistics and The E1 254 (2014) OEF witnessed high diversity in terms of CGPA, course program and department of the different students that enrolled for the online forum. The different types of students also showed variation in their levels of participation on the forum (See Figure 2(b)). The participation levels on the 2014 OEF were higher as compared to the 2012 OEF in terms of the number of questions and answers posted by the enrolled students (See Figure 3(a)). This is despite the fact that the number of enrolled students and the forum duration were lower for the 2014 OEF. Figure 3(b) gives a ﬁne-grained view of the difference in the participation levels in the two OEFs. We thus conclude that incentives that were offered in the 2014 OEF had a major impact on improvement of participation levels in the 2014 class. We witnessed different levels of participation from the enrolled students with the total number of posts by a student varying from 0 to mid-30’s (See Figure 3(c)). The students also vary in the amount of effort they are willing to put for participation in the online forums. This effort is subjective to a student based on various factors like her capabilities and commitments towards other courses etc. We thus roughly categorize the students as low, medium, high and very high cost (of effort) incurring students depending on their total participation levels through the forum duration (See Figure 3(c)). Low cost (of effort) incurring students posted more than 30 posts on the forum and were very active throughout the forum duration irrespective of participation levels of other students and the instructor. This behavior in online forums has also been observed by Huang et. al citepHUANG14 and they term such students as “superposters” (marked in a black oval shape in Figure 3(c)). Figure 3: Figures 3(a) to (c) correspond to evaluations of participation levels in the Piazza forums of the Game Theory Course for two terms (2012 and 2014) held at the Department of CSA, IISc. The incentives that were ﬁxed for the OEF of the E1 254 course (offered in 2014) were decided by taking some basic guidelines as those offered in the Yahoo! Q&A forums citepJAIN09 and tweaking them a bit to suit our objective. So, the results we have observed are indicative of the general behavior of the students and the positive role that the incentives play in OEFs. The importance of OEFs towards improving the learning of the students and the issues these forums face along with the case study motivate us to do an extensive mathematical modeling of these OEFs. We understand that we might not be able to incorporate all these real life observations in theory and so, in the mathematical modeling part of the report, we shall make suitable assumptions at appropriate junctures. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss the setting of an online education forum (OEF) and then propose a CTMC to model the arrivals on this forum. We deﬁne a suitable reward structure on top of this CTMC and analyze the net-rewards received by the students as well as the instructor. We assume that the instructor and the students participating in the OEF are all non-strategic agents i.e., their rates of participation on the forum are known to the model. We consider an online classroom setting with approach to structure the activities in the OEFs (see Figure 4). Henceforth, we will assume the activities of the OEF 1: Instructor chooses an arrival rate to the forum and announces this to the class. 2: Students (of different types) observe the instructor announcement and decide their corresponding rate of arrival. 3: Instructor and the student record the next arrival time based on their corresponding chosen arrival rates. 4: while Course has not ended do 23: end while follows as outlined in Figure 4. We assume that the arrivals of the independent Poisson processes with rate modeling assumption is that only the instructor can post questions on to the OEF. Also, once the instructor arrives on the forum, the current question is closed, the students are rewarded based on the number of answers they have given to this question and a new question is posted. Hence, there is a single active question on the forum at any time which remains open until the next visit of the instructor. Closing a question here means not allowing to post further on that question and henceforth, not awarding for answering the closed question. Hence, the students will not ﬁnd it beneﬁcial to answer the closed questions and thus, it is assumed that they answer only the currently open question. An interesting future direction could be to model the scenario where questions may be posted by both the students and the instructor. We capture the heterogeneity among students by allowing the students of type classroom s.t. hence, incurs a cost. Also, as the students belonging to the same type are similar, we assume that the cost of answering a question will be same for all students per question and has to decide a suitable allocation of the budget among the different students belonging to the Letmdenote the maximum number of answers per question for which the rewards will be given out, for each student i ∈ T ype We now model the activities of the OEF as a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC) the set of states of the stochastic process of this section in Table 1. We enumerate the students in the class as x = (x, . . . , x question. If into a state state space. When the instructor comes on the forum, the current question is closed and a new question is started, thus taking the CTMC to state when initially posted by the instructor had no answers from any student. Thus, the CTMC will be capturing arrivals of answers for the single question that is active in the forum at a particular instant of time. For readers not familiar with CTMC, state i to state j. To be precise, let P ), where eachxcorresponds to the number of answers received from theistudent for the current X(t)is in some statex : (x, . . . , x, . . . , x)and studentigives an answer on the forum thenX(t)goes y : (x, . . . , x+ 1, . . . , x), thus capturing each arrival and reﬂecting the current forum status through its The CTMC being considered is actually an inﬁnite state CTMC but since the course will be offered for a limited time and that the instructor and the students are arriving at some reasonable rates allow us to approximate a reasonably large upper bound transforms our inﬁnite state CTMC to a ﬁnite state CTMC where the ‘last’ state will be state, the arrival of only the instructor will be captured and the only transition possible from this state will be to the state (0, . . . , 0) a sample CTMC in Figure 5 where there are only two students in the OEF. Letλdenote the rate of arrival of student starts a new one, so, because of the instructor’s arrival, each state is transitioning to state that at any instant of time there can only be a single arrival and then the CTMC will evolve into the next state. Thus, for any two states CTMC X(t) will be deﬁned as: . So, the CTMC state spaceSwill be deﬁned asS = {(x, . . . , x, . . . , x)|x∈ {0, 1, . . . , M }}. We depict Figure 5: Representative CTMC in our model with 2 students: Each state is capturing the number of answers received from both the students, for a particular question. Note that due to our ﬁniteness assumption the number of entries in the we can say that each entry in the steady state (if it exists) and transient state probability vectors of X(t). Each state instructor have some costs and rewards associated with them. In this section, we deﬁne a net-reward associated with each state in S for the students as well as the instructor. The maximum number of answers for which the rewards will be given out, per question, is ﬁxed for each asm. So, if a additional factor which determines the quantity of rewards being given is that if the instructor might not be willing to give out much reward per answer if she is coming too often and answering the questions herself. So, we introduce δ ∈ (0, 1) applied by the instructor for ‘rewardable’ answer, where h(µ) = log µ then the following will be the reward received by the student i ∈ T ype The cost per arrival is assumed to be some constant statex : (x received by a student i belonging to T ype The instructor values each answer on the forum arriving from all students but can unequally value the contributions from different students. Instructor’s total reward in a state all students, of the reward she receives on arrival from a single student. We use towards answers from student x ∈ X(t)indicates the number of arrivals on the OEF bynstudents. The arrivals of the students and the T ypestudent answersktimes, then the number of answers that are ‘rewardable’ aremin(k, m). An as the willingness of the instructor to reward the students andδgives the actual discounting factor . So, if the instructor comes online when the Markov chain is in some statex = (x, . . . , x, . . . , x), , . . . , x, . . . , x), then the cost incurred by a studentibelonging toT ypeisαx. Thus the net-reward the same type are assumed to be similar, so the instructor will value their arrivals equally The instructor intends to maximize the student participation and hence the reward to the instructor if student answers will be given by the instructor receives in some state x : (x Instructor will also incur a cost per arrival to the forum, let us denote this by instructor on arriving once to the forum when X(t) is in state x will be: The initial state of the CTMC will be the state will be zero. Thus, the initial distribution 0 ∀x ∈ S \ {(0, . . . , 0)} The expected transient net-reward R We can deﬁne the expected transient net-reward of the instructor at time t by: The OEF for an online classroom will be functioning for a certain period of time we need calculate the expected transient aggregate net-rewards over time (if the steady state probability vector of the CTMC exists) collected by the students and the instructor. The expected transient aggregate net-reward collected by the instructor R Similarly, the expected steady state net-reward for the students R As the state space of probabilities of the CTMC for this complex CTMC and so we shall now use the approach of lumping a CTMC to simplify the analysis of the expected net-rewards for this CTMC. In this section, we introduce the concept of lumpability of Markov chains, in the context of discrete time as well as continuous time. We highlight some key results related to lumpability which we will use in reducing the CTMC for the OEF (shown in Figure 3(b)) into simpler student-speciﬁc lumped CTMCs. We summarize important notations of this section in Table 2. 6.1 Lumpability of Markov Chains - Important Results from Literature It may be difﬁcult to check Deﬁnition 1 for all initial probability vectors. Kemeny et.al [Kemeny and Snell, 1960] provide the following necessary and sufﬁcient condition for lumpability which is easy to verify. For notational ease, we use p(x, A) = is called the lumped stochastic process of Ywith respect to the partition S. [Sumita and Rieders, 1989] A ﬁnite DTMCYonSis said to be lumpable with respect to the partition Pp(x, z) where A ⊆ S. Consider a ﬁnite CTMC the lumped process of However, the lumpability of CTMC can be characterized in terms of a related DTMC as follows. Theorem 2. Q(x, y)are bounded by some positive constant such that • the distribution vector π(t) of the CTMC at time t starting with π(0) at time 0 is given by Equation 4 states that the probability of being in a state all possible number of jumps underlying DTMC immediate corollary of Theorem 2 is the following : Corollary 1. lumpable w.r.t. a partition (ii)In such a case, the lumped Markov chain 6.1.3 Transient and Steady-State Probabilities of the Lumped Process For a DTMC The following theorem relates the transient probability of the lumped Markov process with the transient probability of the original Markov chain. Theorem 3. be lumpable w.r.t. the partition ∀S∈ S, for π Therefore, the probability that the lumped DTMC is in a block after probabilities of the states belonging to the same block in the original DTMC. The next theorem provides a sufﬁcient condition for the lumped CTMC to have a stationary distribution and connects this distribution with the stationary distribution of the original CTMC. Theorem 4. Π. If it is lumpable w.r.t. a partition of the state space, then the lumped chain also has a stationary distribution components can be obtained from Π by adding corresponding components in the same block of the partition. Recall the CTMC in Equation 1. This CTMC represents the OEF but is very complex to analyze because of its large state space (|S| = (M + 1) exp(−ˆqt)((ˆqt) We omit the initial distribution P [Kemeny and Snell, 1960](i)A ﬁnite DTMCY= (S, P )is lumpable with respect to the partitionS = (S, P ) is determined by P(S, S) = p(x, S) for some x ∈ S. ([Sumita and Rieders, 1989],[Buchholz, 1994]) Consider a CTMC X(t)= (S, Q). If the transition rates where πis the distribution vector of Yafter k jumps. ([Sumita and Rieders, 1989],[Derisavi et al., 2003],[Buchholz, 1994])(i)A CTMCX(t)=(S, Q) is (S, P ), let us deﬁneP(x)to be the probability that the Markov chain will be at statexafterksteps. ([Sumita and Rieders, 1989], (Theorem5in [Buchholz, 1994])) Let the ﬁnite state DTMCY= (S, π)P (S) =π(y) ∀S∈ S. ([Tian and Kannan, 2006],§2.12) Let X(t) be an aperiodic, irreducible CTMC with stationary distribution ). So, we exploit the basic structure of the problem and come up with lumped-CTMCs with smaller Figure 6: Light-gray and dark-gray quadrilaterals in the ﬁgure depict two partitions of the state space that can be deﬁned on the example CTMC given in Figure 5. Each light-gray quadrilateral contains the states where the number of arrivals of student 1 are same. Each dark-gray quadrilateral contains the states where the number of arrivals of student 2 are equal. state-space which will be easier to analyze. An important characteristic to note about our problem is that the rewards and costs incurred for each student in a particular state are independent of the other students and dependent only on their own strategy and the instructor’s strategy. This is possible because of the property of open-ended questions that they have more than one possible answer and thus, even if an open-ended question has already been answered by a few students, still a new student can ﬁnd it beneﬁcial to give a new answer and potentially earn a good reward. Hence, instead of analyzing the complex CTMC, which keeps track of arrivals of all students (of all types), we show that we can analyze CTMC keeps track of arrivals from only a particular student. This is possible by applying the lumping process on the original-CTMC which we describe next. We lump together all the states in one light gray quadrilateral (having same number of answers from Student 1 in Figure 6 as one state of the lumped chain in Figure 7 (a). For example, the state {(1, 0), (1, 1), . . . , (1, M)} from Figure 6, and so on. Similarly, all the states in the dark gray quadrilateral (having same number of answers from Student 2) are represented as one state of the lumped chain in Figure 7 (b). We now present a result which states that, given student in Appendix A. Theorem 5. (ii)The quotient (lumped) Markov chain (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}) is given as : i,X(t)is lumpable w.r.t. partitionS. Detailed proofs of the results presented in this section are provided (i) X(t) = (S, Q) is lumpable w.r.t. partition S= {S|a ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M }}. Figure 7: CTMC which are enclosed by the light-gray quadrilateral. the aggregation of all the states in the Figure 6 CTMC which are enclosed by the dark-gray quadrilateral. So, from Theorem 5, we now have spaceS X(t)i.e. a state which the student received from student i. Now, using Theorem 5 (ii) the generator matrix Q The initial state distribution no answer would be posted on the forum by any student. Also, let probability vector (if it exists) and the transient state probability vector for the lumped CTMC X We shall now deﬁne the notions of rewards, net-rewards, and expected net-rewards corresponding to the CTMC, for both the student original-CTMC (as given in Section 5.2). The reward the forum and ﬁnds X As discussed before (in Section 5.2), a a student i of T ype In fact a general form of Theorem 5 is true . Consider a group of students G and deﬁne groupGis ﬁxed at Markov chain this general statement since the proof is quite similar to the proof of Theorem 5 and we will not be using the general lumpability result in our paper. a)Lumped-StudentCTMC : Each light-gray state indicates the aggregation of all the states in the Figure 6 = {x|x ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M}}. Each blockS∈ Shas been represented as a statexof the lumped-CTMC xof the lumped-CTMCX(t)is representative of the blockSwhich contains all the states inSin = {(x, x) : x= a}, ∀a ∈ {0, 1, ..., M}i.e. we lump together all the states where the entries for the students in a. Then we can prove that the CTMCX(t) = (S, Q)is lumpable w.r.t. the partition¯S. Moreover, the lumped ¯X= (¯S,¯Q)is given as¯Q(¯S,¯S) = Q(a, b)whereQ(a, b)is deﬁned in Equation 1. We omit the proof of As each state of the lumped-CTMC the reward inX(t), if the instructor arrives on the forum when r(x) = xδ then the net-reward to the instructor will be: if she arrives on the forum at time given by: We shall now deﬁne the expected transient aggregate net-rewards over time net-rewards (if steady state probability vector of the lumped CTMC w.r.t. the CTMC X The expected transient aggregate net-rewards over time accumulate over time T from the arrivals captured using the lumped-CTMC X The expected steady state net-rewards for the student expected net-rewards received by the student Rand R As each lumped-CTMC instructor in and the total steady state reward that the instructor receives from all the The instructor has a bias the expected net-rewards received by the instructor in all the net-reward received by the instructor from the arrival of all the students on the OEF. The next lemma proves that the transient probability the transient probabilities π Lemma 1. π rcollected by the instructor by arrivals from studenti. As only one student’s arrivals are being tracked (Refer Section 5.2 for details.). Also, if we take into account the cost per arrival of the instructor where, R(x) : Net-reward to the instructor in state x of X(t) (t)will be denoted byRandRrespectively. These are the rewards that the studentiand the instructor respectively. These will be deﬁned as: X(t)is from studenti’s arrivals only. So lets deﬁneR,Ras the total aggregate reward over timeT (x) =π(x) The following lemma proves that the expected transient net-reward to the student using the CTMCs calculate the net-reward to the student i using the i The following lemma proves that the expected transient net-reward to the instructor is the same when calculated using the CTMC X(t)for student X(t) to calculate the instructor’s expected transient net-reward. Next we prove that the original CTMC relationship between them. Lemma 4. The CTMC X(t) = (S, Q) is irreducible and positive recurrent and a steady state vector Π exists for this CTMC. Lemma 5. exists for this CTMC. Also each component of Π Theorem 6. received by the students and the instructor is the same when calculated using the original CTMC CTMCs X • Expected transient aggregate net-rewards over time T . • Expected steady-state net-rewards. Thus, the expected transient net-rewards to the students and the instructor at time CTMCsX on the lumped-CTMCs for each student instead of the original-CTMC. Recall that each lumped-CTMC it: max-arrival instructor arrival and the generator matrix the CTMC given in Figure 7 (a). We give the matrix representation of the generator matrix bounded by a large value CTMC X Using this generator matrix, we shall now solve for the steady state and transient probabilities for the lumped-CTMC and use these to calculate the expected steady state and transient aggregate net-rewards received by the students and the instructor (given by Theorem 6). Detailed proofs of the results presented in this section are provided in Appendix B. X(t)and when calculated as a weighted sum of the instructor’s expected transient net-rewards w.r.t. CTMCs i : 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Therefore we can utilize the lumped CTMCsX(t)instead of the original CTMC The lumped-CTMCX(t) = (S, Q)is irreducible and positive recurrent and a steady state vectorΠP The expected transient aggregate net-rewards over timeTand the expected steady-state net-rewards (t) i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. a) R= Rb) R= R. (t)(1 ≤ i ≤ n) instead of using the original complex CTMCX(t). So, for our analysis, we shall now focus M, max-rewardm, course duration timeT, rate of arrivalλfor the studentiin the OEF and the rate of µﬁxed by the instructor. Also recall that the state spaceSofX(t)is given byS= {0, 1, . . . , M} (t) is deﬁned as π(0) = 1 and π(x) = 0∀x ∈ S\ {0}. Steady state probability X(t)has reached a steady state. Lemma 5 states that a steady state exists for this CTMC and so using the generator matrix Q Lemma 6. The solution to equations 9, 10, and 11 is: Using these steady state probabilities, we calculate the expected steady state net-rewards of the students and the instructor (from student i’s participation) in X Theorem 7. The expected steady state net-rewards of the student i and the instructor in X Transient state probability following differential equations for the transient probability vectors π We now present some important results regarding transient probabilities. Detailed proofs of the results presented in this section are provided in Appendix C. Lemma 7. to the equations 12, 13, and 14 is given by: We now calculate the expected transient aggregate net-rewards over time student i’s participation) using the lumped-CTMC X , we come up with the following equations for the steady state probability vector Πof X(t): Given the initial distributionπforX(t)(π(0) = 1andπ(x) = 0 ∀x ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M}). The solution (M) =1 −π(x), where K= (λ+ µ) Theorem 8. The expected transient aggregate net-rewards of the student i and the instructor in X By Theorem 6, we can calculate the expected net-rewards received by the students in an OEF from the net-reward obtained by the student expected transient aggregate reward Rand transient aggregate net-rewards R By Theorem 6, we can calculate the net-reward received by the instructor in an OEF by taking a weighted sum over the expected net-rewards to the instructor received through the lumped-CTMCs compute the instructor’s expected steady state net-reward the OEF by respectively taking weighted sums over the expected steady state net-rewards expected transient aggregate net-rewards So far, we have assumed that the arrival rates of the instructor and the enrolled students are known to the model but this is unrealistic in the real world as the students and the instructor are strategic agents who will have a range of arrival rates to choose from and wish to maximize their utilities by choosing an optimal strategy (rate of arrival). We summarize important notations of this section in Table 3. We assume that the instructor is a social-welfare maximizing agent whose goal is to maximize the students’ understanding of the subject by enabling them to discuss frequently among themselves in the OEF. The students typically will have commitments towards other courses and hence, their objective will be to maximize the rewards they get from answering questions in the OEF while minimizing their cost (of visiting the forum and answering a question). We assume that the instructor’s strategy will be announced ﬁrst following which the students will decide their strategy. We thus formulate an OEF as a Stackelberg game where the players are: an instructor offering the online course and each of the Stackelberg game. • We assume the strategy space of the players is ﬁnite. The key idea behind the formulation of the Stackelberg game is to link the expected net-rewards of the CTMC (when the strategies are known to the model) as derived in Theorems 7 and 8 to the strategic scenario where the players are optimizing their corresponding utility functions. We make this intuition clear in the following subsections by deﬁning the utility functions of the students and instructor and putting these two together in a bi-level optimization problem which solves for the optimal instructor and students’ strategies. We establish some basic notations before we formulate the game. We denote the ﬁnite strategy set of the instructor and the students by instructor and the students can choose their respective rates of arrival. The rates in the sets and are in the range [0, bq]. The instructor can choose a pure/mixed strategy over in probability simplex, Ω(G We deﬁne expected net-reward matrices entry denotes the expected steady state net-reward received by the student chooses the pure strategy received by student i of T ype Now, suppose the instructor has ﬁxed a (pure/mixed) strategy φ and the student i has ﬁxed a (pure/mixed) strategy ψ Using the above deﬁnitions, the expected steady state utility the course duration T ) to a student i of T ype nstudents enrolled for the course. We make the following assumptions related to the formulation of the Instructor acts as a leader who decides her strategy (rate of arrival) ﬁrst and the students act as the followers who after observing the instructor’s strategy will ﬁnalize their own strategy (rate of arrival) in order to maximize their utility. φis the proportion of times that pure strategy∆is used. Similarly,ψdenotes the pure/mixed strategy of the student i which is a point in probability simplex Ω(G), where basically represents the proportion of times in which pure strategy Λis used. Proof. Please check the Appendix D section of the paper for the detailed proof of this result. Using the above deﬁnitions, we now formulate the (steady state) optimization problem for student instructor has ﬁxed a strategy φ. Note that students belonging to the same type can have different optimal strategies in response to the same instructor strategy as the optimization problem given in Equation 17 can have multiple solutions. Due to symmetry among students belonging to the same type, we assume that students belonging to the same type will choose the same optimal strategy i.e. ψ Hence, we can infer that, instead of solving the student (steady state) optimization problem (Equation 17) for each studenti, j representative T ype. Thus the (steady state) optimization problem to be solved by each representative student The optimization problem for the expected transient aggregate utilities will be similar to the steady-state counterpart discussed above. We now deﬁne similarly the steady state utility when she has ﬁxed her strategy as matricesB state utility received by the instructor and each instructor w.r.t. student Proposition 2. instructor w.r.t. students i, j belonging to T ype Proof. Please check the Appendix D section of the paper for the detailed proof of this result. Studentsi, jbelonging to the same typeT ypereceive equal utility (steady state and transient aggregate) is the optimal rate of arrival of student i of T ypein response to instructor strategy φ. = ψ= ψ∀i, j ∈ T ype. belonging to a particular typeT ype, we can just solve the student optimization problem for a single T ypestudent (now represented asl) and her optimal policyψwould be followed by each studentiof andBfor the instructor corresponding to each studentiwhere eachBentry denotes the steady The net-reward matricesB, B(steady state) andB, B(transient aggregate) for the The instructor is the leader, so she chooses her policy chosen by the instructor and then decides the policy maximize her utility by choosing a solution φ ψ(φ)is the optimal strategy (See Equation 17) of student students belonging to Using, Proposition 2, we get: Dividing the objective function of this (steady state) optimization problem by n, we get Here,p Equation 18, we can rewrite the above problem as: Note that the size of the optimization problem reduces considerably with the introduction of the similarity among students belonging to the same type. Now we have to solve the optimization problem w.r.t to only ofn + 1 the instructor will be similar to the steady-state counterpart discussed above. The (steady state) optimization problem given in Equation 21 is essentially a mixed integer quadratic program (MIQP). We convert this MIQP to a mixed integer linear program (MILP) by following the approach in [Paruchuri et al., 2008] where they solve a Bayesian Stackelberg game by converting a similar bi-level optimization problem into an MILP (See Proposition 2 in [Paruchuri et al., 2008]). Thus, we get the following: = n/ni.e. the proportion of the class that belongs toT ype. Using the student optimization problem in agents and in generalL << n. The optimization problem using the expected transient aggregate utilities for Here,ξ Parachuri et. al [Paruchuri et al., 2008]). Analogously, we can come up with MILP formulation considering the expected transient aggregate utilities and they are given below. The solution to the optimization problem (22) (based on steady state utilities) and optimization problem (23) (based on transient utilities) provide us with the optimal strategies solve the MILP using ILOG-CPLEX [ILOG, 2014] software and study the changing dynamics of the student-instructor interactions in an online classroom by varying the different parameters of the model. Table 4 lists the values and ranges for various parameters used in the simulations. We substantiate the importance of transient analysis [Narahari and Viswanadham, 1994] of the proposed CTMC for online classroom setting by studying the variation of the normalized error between the student utility values obtained through the steady and transient analyses. We deﬁne For illustration purposes, we assume that only cost per arrival for each of these students as: time (Figure 8). = φψ,ηis derived through duality, andNis a large constant (The details can be seen in Normalized Error =U−, where Uand Uare respectively the steady state and transient utilities of a student as deﬁned in Equation 16. Figure 8: Study normalized error in student utility using the steady state and transient analyses as time evolves. We observe from Figure 8 that the normalized error tends to zero as time progresses. But this error becomes negligible only after 10-15 weeks and is quite signiﬁcant before that period. The typical duration of online classrooms is around 4-10 weeks [Haggard, 2013] and this necessitates the use of transient analysis over steady state analysis in such a setting for accurate results. Note that the normalized error can be any value greater than or equal to zero as the steady state and avg. aggregate utilities can have the same or opposite signs at a time other parameter conﬁgurations as well and hence we do not discuss them here. Also, due to the signiﬁcance of the transient analysis, we shall provide the simulation results from only the transient analysis of our model. The results based on steady state analysis follow a similar trend. 8.2 Heterogeneous Student Participation: Effect of Budget and Instructor Rate We study the variation in the optimal student participation rate ( mfor different student types in Figure 9. We observe that, if we keep either increases or remains the same. Hence, giving higher rewards can increase student participation but only up to a certain extent. If we ﬁx per arrival ( motivated and have only a limited impact of OEF being only slightly affected by the instructor participation rates. This phenomenon is also corroborated in our empirical study as shown in Figure 3(a). Figure 9: Variation of the optimal participation rates ( by four different that type. The graphs. However, we observe non-monotonic participation patterns for students with high cost per arrival ( Figures 9(c) and 9(d) as falling. This trend has been noted in literature (for example: [Ghosh and Kleinberg, 2013]). Our model is thus able to corroborate real-world behavior of heterogeneous students in an OEF varying from the disinterested students to those who are highly active. We observe that the active students are self-motivated and will visit the forum even for low rewards and their level of participation generally increases as the instructor arrives more frequently on the OEF. However, the not-so-active students want high rewards and lower instructor participation i.e., they want lesser questions (and more time) with higher incentives. 8.3 Instructor-Student Arrival Rates: Effect of Instructor Bias It is generally observed that instructors have varying notions of bias towards different types of students. Some instructors may value the participation from the weaker students higher than good students while others may focus on the brighter students. In our model, the parameter parameter is an input parameter to the model and is set based on how the instructor values an answer from the different types of students. We consider a class with 1000 students categorized into two types (Table 4). For illustration purposes, we consider 2 students from this class: Student (belonging to each parameter takes values: 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 high value ( mand study the variation ofλwith changingµin Figure 9(a) to Figure 9(d), we observe that as the cost α) of a student increases,λbecomes sensitive toµ. This means that the students with lowerαare self α’s) with change in the instructor’s arrival rate (µ) and the maximum number of rewards (m) given to X − ZandY − Zprojections of Figures 9c and 9d are given as insets to aid the understanding of the T ypewith highα) who does not like to post frequently on the OEF. We ﬁx the following parameters: (budget allocated per question to answers from Type 1 students),m(budget for Type 2 students) where ) conﬁgurations. We ﬁrst set the instructor bias as a low value (c= (0.01/n)) for Student 1 and as a c= (0.99/n)) for Student 2 wherenandnare number of students ofT ypeandT yperespectively. Figure 10: Effect of Instructor bias on the optimal participation rates of a Type optimal participation rate of a Type indicate conﬁgurations where m We examine the optimal rates of participation for Student 1, Student 2, and instructor for each of the possible conﬁgurations in the presence of instructor bias towards certain type of students. Note that a conﬁguration basically corresponds to a ﬁxed value for the parameters: (α We will initially consider an instructor with low bias towards Student c= (0.01/n andcis the bias of instructor towards Student described in Equation 19. Under this setting, we generate scatter plots depicting optimal participation rates where each point in the scatter plot corresponds to one of the numbered uniquely so that we can compare the results when the instructor reverses his bias values. The scatter plots are given in Figure 10(a), Figure 10(c), and Figure 10(e) and these correspond to the optimal rates of participation for Student 1, Student 2, and instructor respectively. Note that these plots correspond to the scenario when the instructor has low bias to Student 1 and high bias to Student 2. We change the instructor behaviour to have high bias towards Student 1 and very low bias towards Student 2 ﬁxing similarly for the and instructor are given in Figure 10(b), Figure 10(d), and Figure 10(f) respectively. We observe that, if the instructor’s bias towards Student not participate even for medium and high rewards (for example: conﬁgs 45, 56 in Figure 10(a) have optimal rate as 0) whereas if the instructor’s bias towards Type with high rates for medium and high rewards and increase their participation levels even for the lower rewards (for example: conﬁgs 45, 56 in Figure 10(a) have optimal rate 10 while conﬁg 09 improved from rate 0 in Figure 10(a) to rate 4 in Figure 10(b)). We also see that there is a dip in participation of Student 2 for many conﬁgurations when the instructor decreases his bias to Student 2 (See Figure 10(c) and Figure 10(d)). For example, see conﬁgs 01, 28 in )andc= (0.99/n)wherenandnare the number of students ofT ypeandT yperespectively 81parameter conﬁgurations as given above. The optimal participation rates of Student 1, Student 2, Figure 10(c) and Figure 10(d). In Figure 10(c) for Conﬁg 01, Student 2 participates with Rate 1 whereas when the instructor decreases bias to Student 2, for this conﬁguration, Student 2 optimal rate decreases to Rate 0 as shown in Figure 10(d). Similarly Student 2 decreases his optimal rate from Rate 4 to Rate 2 when the instructor decreases the bias for Student 2 for the conﬁguration 28 as shown in Figure 10(c) and Figure 10(d). We also observe that the instructor needs to increase his/her participation when there is a higher bias to Student 1 than the scenario when there is a higher bias to Student 2. This is beacuse Student 1 is an enthusiastic student compared to Student 2 and hence, to keep the attention of Student 1 , the instructor needs to post more questions on the forum. In the scenario where the instructor has high bias to Student 2, the optimal rate of the instructor can be low as Student 2 dislikes answering too many questions on the forum as the cost of answering the questions overshadows the rewards obtained by Student 2. To summarize, these experiments shed interesting insights into the role of instructor bias parameter of our proposed OEF model and thus, makes our proposed OEF model more realistic. It has been observed that participation of students is indeed affected by instructor biases towards certain students and the instructor bias parameter enables us to capture this effect in our proposed model for OEFs. In this work, we performed empirical analysis of online education forums (OEFs) of the Game Theory course offered in the Indian Institute of Science in 2012 and 2014. We identiﬁed several key parameters which dictate the activities of OEFs like student heterogeneity, effective incentive design, super-posters phenomenon, etc. Motivated by empirical observations, we proposed a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC) model to capture instructor -student interactions in an OEF. Using concepts from lumpability of CTMCs, we performed steady state and transient analysis evaluate expected steady state and transient aggregate net-rewards for the instructor and the students. We then formulated a mixed-integer linear program which views the OEFs strategically as a single-leader-multiple-follower Stackelberg game. We undertook detailed simulations and develop new insights into the activities of OEF by studying the effects of parameters like participation costs, budget and instructor bias on the student/instructor participation rates. Our model corroborated with some key empirical observations and could recommend an optimal plan to the instructor for maximizing student participation in OEFs. The analysis used in the paper assumed certain parameters (for eg: preprocessing stage could be introduced to optimally solve for such parameters which could improve the results of the model. Further, students could collude on their strategies to improve utilities while reducing their participation levels. Devising instructor-driven collusion-resistant strategies could be an interesting direction. Our work does not consider effort modeling of the students. Information about the effort put by the students could guide the incentive design and may result in better quality of participation among the students in the OEFs.