Optimization of the double electron-electron resonance for C-centers in diamond  Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudniy, Moscow Region, Russia P. N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia LLC Sensor Spin Technologies, Moscow, Russia Rusian Quantum Center, Moscow, Russia The University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany LLC Velman, Novosibirsk, Russia Texas A&M University, 4242 TAMU, College Station, USA E-mail: akimov@physics.tamu.edu  Keywords: NV-center, C-center, diamond, double electron-electron resonance  NV centers in diamond recommend themselves as good sensors of environmental fields as well as detectors of diamond impurities. In particular, C-centers, often also called detected via double electron-electron resonance. This resonance can be used to measure the Ccenter concentration. Here, we measured the concentration of C-centers in several diamond plates and investigated the influence of the free precession time of the NV center on the observed contrast in the measured double electron-electron resonance spectrum. The dependence of the resonance amplitudes and widths on the concentration of C-centers as well as the length of the combined Ccenter driving and NV-center was determined for each C-center concentration, showing a strong correlation with both the concentration of C-centers and the NV-center structure of radicals[2]. This method in its variation, based on nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond[3], has established itself as an excellent method for detecting various spin impurities both inside diamond[4–6] and on its surface[7]. The method uses the NV center as a sensitive element for local magnetic fields[8]. The spin echo[9] signal responds to changes in the local field generated by the spin environment when a resonant radio frequency (RF) field is applied to this environment[10]. Thus, by scanning the frequency of the radio-frequency field, it is possible to obtain the DEER spectrum containing information about the possible states of the spin environment of the NV center[10]. in addition to its natural high abundance, it also limits the performance of the NV-center as a sensor. Thus, NV centers are naturally used to detect and study C centers[12]. To this end, DEER enables one to not only detect the spectrum for the defect[12] but also determine its concentration[13], which, while not inferred from the spectrum itself, can be measured using a modified pulse sequence for DEER. of the measured DEER spectrum for C centers was investigated. The optimal precession time in terms of the contrast was found for each concentration of the C-center, showing a strong correlation with both the concentration of C-centers and the NV-center of C-centers (from 1 to 60 ppm) in 8 diamond plates was measured using both modified DEER spectroscopy [13] and infrared spectroscopy[14]. The dependence of the resonance amplitudes and width on the concentration of C-centers as well as the length of the combined C-center driving and NV-center method[15], irradiated with electrons[16] at a dose of temperature of spectrum is described in detail in[13]. Experiments were conducted in an 85 G magnetic field created by permanent magnets, which allows us to split the degenerate levels of NV centers and C centers due to the Zeeman effect (Figure 1A). With this magnitude of magnetic field, the DEER spectrum of the C-center should be in the range of 100 MHz to 500 MHz. The magnetic field was set so that its direction coincided with the (111) axis of the diamond plate.  1. Introduction Double electron-electron resonance (DEER)[1] is often used in chemistry to determine the  The donor nitrogen or C-center is one of the most studied spin defects in diamond[11], since,  In this paper, the influence of the free precession time of the NV center on the observed contrast  2. Methods All investigated diamond plates were grown by the high-pressure high-temperature resonance[13]. Then, using the Rabi oscillations[17] at the resonant frequency of the NV center, the duration of the π-pulse was determined, which can be controlled by the power of the microwave field applied to the ensemble of NV centers. The DEER sequence is composed of a spin echo[9] sequence on an ensemble of NV centers accompanied by a RF pulse (Figure 1B). The length of the RF pulse is chosen to match the NV of the RF pulse frequency is varied, while all other parameters are kept the same (Figure 1C). that requires optimization depending on the nitrogen concentration. Since the NV center serves as a sensor for the spectral measurements, it is expected that the properties of the NV centers can have an effect on the measured spectrum. In particular, the free precession time is limited by the coherence time  NV centers were driven at the frequency determined from the optically detectable magnetic  Figure 1. A) The NV-center and C-center energy levels in a constant magnetic field. The arrows show the allowed transitions used in the experiment. B) ω - the frequency of the NV-center transition used, ω - the scanned RF frequency for Ccenter detection. C) DEER spectrum. The frequencies ω denote the resonances corresponding to the transitions at these frequencies in Figure 1A. The signs  and  denote the resonances of the C-centers that are aligned and not aligned with the external magnetic field, respectively.  The free precession time  was kept fixed for each specific measurement, but it is a parameter concentration[18]. For diamond plates under study, the coherence time varied between a few microseconds for highly concentrated diamond (approximately 50 ppm of nitrogen) and 130 μs for low concentrated diamond plates (approximately 1 ppm of nitrogen). Longer 300 μs are possible for even lower nitrogen concentrations[19].  DEER pulse sequence, as described in previous work[13]. To reconcile the results, the C-center concentration in these samples was also determined by infrared (IR) spectroscopy. The measurement results obtained using these methods are in good agreement (see Figure 2A). The measurement results obtained using the two methods do not coincide completely due to the inhomogeneity of the defect concentration in the diamond plates and the different investigation volumes used for the two methods. The IR spectroscopy method averages the concentration over the whole plate, whereas the DEER method obtains the concentration from the focal spot volume. To overcome concentration fluctuations, several spots were measured by DEER methods.  To measure the C-center concentration in diamonds, we used the method based on the modified  Figure 2. A) Correlation between IR spectroscopy and DEER method measurements of C-center concentrations. n stands for the concentration measured by the IR method, and n stands for the concentration measured by the DEER method. The dashed line demonstrates a linear fit nn=+. B) T coherence time of the NV-center ensemble depending on the C-center concentration. The dashed line shows the empirical estimation  from[18].  The coherence time T was measured for all samples studied using the spin-echo method[20].  50 1.5 ppm by also correlate with the measured values for the C-center concentrations, as shown in Figure 2B, and indeed follows the dependence sets the upper limit on the possible free precession time observed DEER spectra (Figure 3C,D).  C nuclear spin[14], as shown in Figure 3B. The measured coherence times in our experiment  Figure 3. NV-centered spin-echo signal for diamond with a concentration of approximately 50 ppm A) and a concentration of approximately 1 ppm B). Partial optical DEER spectra obtained for diamond with C) the diamond plate from A and free precession time 1 s= (red dot at A) and D) with the diamond plate from B and free precession time 22 s= (red dot at B). For C and D, red dots and lines correspond to the part of the C-center ensemble aligned along the magnetic field, and the green dots and lines correspond to the part that is not aligned with the magnetic field. RF power was adjusted for each resonance so that the RF pulse was a -pulse. understand the spectrum parameters, the measured spectra were fitted by the Lorentz fitting function: where – resonance frequency are fit parameters. With such a fit, for an optical DEER spectrum measured at ~50 ppm (Figure 3C) С-centers ensemble, the HWHM on average is 3.7 MHz and that for a 1 ppm ensemble (Figure 3D) on average is approximated as 2.3 MHz, which, thus, shows a change in the HWHM. Here, to take into account the efficiency of the antenna and differences in oscillation strengths, RF power was adjusted so that the RF pulse area is equal to resonances. Therefore, the spectrum was taken piecewise[13]. The relative change in linewidth is much smaller than both the change in concentration and the change in free precision time. Thus, in the range of the investigated concentrations, the linewidth is not defined by concentration and is not Fourier limited by the free precession time. A similar conclusion was previously reported [21], where inhomogeneous broadening of C-centers is believed to be the main contribution to the resonance widths. was varied in the range from 200 ns to a value not exceeding twice the coherence time in each sample studied. It was observed that the contrast magnitude at different values of six presented resonances (marked with different colors) have the maximum contrast at the same optimal free precession time. To find the value for this optimal free precession time, the dependence of the DEER contrast on where maximum – optimal centers in the sample. A comparison of the measured 4B. The optimal free precession time is consistent with the linear dependence on the NV center coherence time  3. Results The free precession time  has several effects on the observed DEER spectra. To better  C – contrast,  – half-width at half maximum (HWHM) of the resonance peak, and   Next, the effect of free precession time  on the DEER spectrum was investigated. This time  A, , are fitting parameters. This function was differentiated to find the point of  (Figure 1B) were varied. For each duration, the microwave power for the NV centers and the RF power for the C centers were tuned by observing Rabi oscillations to maintain pulse widths equal  The best contrast is achieved at the minimum linewidth of the spectrum also increases with decreasing this linewidth behavior on the width also slightly changes with nitrogen concentration, as shown in Figure 5С; this change is also rather small. the free precession time and the inset).  Figure 4. A) Concentration dependence of optimal free precession time  obtained from DEER. Boxes are used to show the variation in the optimal free precession time between resonances of one sample. The inset shows the dependence of the DEER contrast on the free precession time for each resonance of a single sample. B) Correlation between optimal free precession time  and NV-center coherence time  T. Boxes denote experimental data. The dashed line denotes the fit to the linear function 0.35T=.  In the next part of the experiment, RF and NV-pulse durations in the DEER pulse scheme  . As shown in Figure 5A, the contrast in the DEER spectrum depends on the -pulse duration.  Thus, the contrast in the DEER spectrum depends on two main parameters in the experiment:  -pulse duration and does not change with changes in the free precession time (Figure 5B, parameters can be explained by the assumption that the linewidth for the C-center is limited by the inhomogeneous broadening of the C-center ensemble itself. This assumption agrees with previous study[21]. The fact that the width does not change much with the concentration of C-centers suggests that the dynamics of the C-centers are weakly affected by their concentration in the studied range of concentrations. At the same time, the strong correlation of the DEER contrast  Figure 5. A) Piecewise DEER spectra for an ensemble of C-centers. The spectra obtained at different π-pulse durations T are shown by different colors. The dashed line shows the fit to the Lorentz function. B) Dependence of the DEER spectrum linewidth on the π-pulse duration. The six resonances of the spectrum are shown by different colors. The error is the error in the approximation of the experimental data using the Lorentz function. С) Dependence of the DEER spectrum linewidth on the C-center concentration in the sample. The concentration was determined by using the modified DEER method.  4. Discussion The fact that the linewidth of the DEER resonance barely deepens for all experimental with the optimal free-precession time and the correlation of the latter with the NV-center suggest that the contrast in the DEER spectrum is limited only by NV-center performance, and not by the dynamics of the C-center other than the effect of these dynamics on the NV-centers themselves. using the example of detecting ensembles of C-centers through the fluorescence emitted from an ensemble of NV-centers. The influence of the duration of free precession in the optical DEER scheme on spectral contrast was investigated using samples of both highly concentrated and lowconcentrated diamond plates. Using these dependencies, the optimal values for the duration of the free precession time in the optical DEER experiment were determined. We also demonstrated how the concentration of C-centers in a diamond plate affects the linewidth of the optical DEER spectrum.  The concentrations of C-centers in a number of diamond plates were measured using a modified DEER sequence and compared with concentrations measured by infrared spectroscopy. The dependence of the DEER spectra on the parameters of the DEER sequence was investigated. It was shown that the most sensitive parameter for the DEER spectrum is its contrast, and that this strongly depends on both the free-precession time and length of the free precession time has an optimal value in terms of the DEER spectrum contrast and is linearly dependent on the NV-center parameters of the sequence. The main influence of the resonance width arises from the length of the presumably the dynamics of the C-center themselves. part for the free spin precession time optimization and by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (according to the research project No. 20-32-90025, Grant Aspirants) in part concerning the influence of the C-center concentration in diamond on the coherent properties and linewidth of the DEER spectra.  5. Conclusion We considered in detail the method of optical double electron-electron resonance in diamond  -pulse of the sequence, but, overall, the width has other nonsequence-related sources,  6. Acknowledgments The reported study was funded by the Russian Science Foundation (grant # 21-42-04407) in  7. References diamond using double electron-electron resonance Phys. Rev. B 94 024421  [10]  de Lange G, van der Sar T, Blok M, Wang Z-H, Dobrovitski V and Hanson R 2012 [11]  Fávaro de Oliveira F, Antonov D, Wang Y, Neumann P, Momenzadeh S A, Häußermann T,  [12]  Smith W V., Sorokin P P, Gelles I L and Lasher G J 1959 Electron-spin resonance of [13]  Rubinas O R, Soshenko V V, Bolshedvorskii S V, Cojocaru I S, Zeleneev A I, Vorobyov V V,  [14]  Rubinas O R, Soshenko V V., Bolshedvorskii S V., Zeleneev A I, Galkin A S, Tarelkin S A,  [15]  Rubinas О R, Vorobyov V V, Soshenko V V, Bolshedvorskii S V, Sorokin V N, Smolyaninov  [16]  Zhang C, Yuan H, Zhang N, Xu L X, Li B, Cheng G D, Wang Y, Gui Q and Fang J C 2017  [17]  Childress L, Gurudev Dutt M V, Taylor J, Zibrov a S, Jelezko F, Wrachtrup J, Hemmer P R between Gd3+ ions and nitroxide radicals J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2 604–9 L 2012 Theory of the ground-state spin of the NV − center in diamond Phys. Rev. B 85  205203 R L 2018 Ultralong Dephasing Times in Solid-State Spin Ensembles via Quantum Control  Phys. Rev. X 8 031025 Reports Prog. Phys. 41 1201–48 spectroscopy of small ensemble paramagnetic spins using a single nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond J. Appl. Phys. 120 Schweinfurth D, Sarkar B and Hemmer P 2011 Sensing external spins with nitrogenvacancy diamond New J. Phys. 13 of Electronic Spin Clusters in Solids Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 243604  Controlling the quantum dynamics of a mesoscopic spin bath in diamond. Sci. Rep. 2 382 Pasquarelli A, Denisenko A and Wrachtrup J 2017 Tailoring spin defects in diamond by lattice charging Nat. Commun. 8 15409 nitrogen donors in diamond Phys. Rev. 115 1546–52 Sorokin V N, Vins V G, Smolyaninov A N and Akimov A V 2021 Optical detection of an ensemble of C centres in diamond and their coherent control by an ensemble of NV centres Quantum Electron. 51 938–46 Troschiev S Y, Vorobyov V V., Sorokin V N, Sukhanov A A, Vins V G, Smolyaninov A N and  Akimov A V. 2021 Optimization of the coherence properties of diamond samples with an intermediate concentration of NV centers Results Phys. 21 103845 A N, Vins V G, Yelisseyev A P and Akimov A V 2018 Spin properties of NV centers in highpressure, high-temperature grown diamond J. Phys. Commun. 2 115003 Dependence of high density nitrogen-vacancy center ensemble coherence on electron irradiation doses and annealing time J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 50  [18]  Barry J F, Schloss J M, Bauch E, Turner M J, Hart C A, Pham L M and Walsworth R L 2020 [19]  Herbschleb E D, Kato H, Maruyama Y, Danjo T, Makino T, Yamasaki S, Ohki I, Hayashi K,  [20]  Stanwix P L, Pham L M, Maze J R, Le Sage D, Yeung T K, Cappellaro P, Hemmer P R,  [21]  Fortman B and Takahashi S 2019 Understanding the Linewidth of the ESR Spectrum and Lukin M D 2006 Coherent dynamics of coupled electron and nuclear spin qubits in diamond. Science (80-. ). 314 281–5 Sensitivity optimization for NV-diamond magnetometry Rev. Mod. Phys. 92 Morishita H, Fujiwara M and Mizuochi N 2019 Ultra-long coherence times amongst room-temperature solid-state spins Nat. Commun. 10 8–13 Yacoby A, Lukin M D and Walsworth R L 2010 Coherence of nitrogen-vacancy electronic spin ensembles in diamond Phys. Rev. B 82 201201 Detected by a Single NV Center in Diamond J. Phys. Chem. A 123 6350–5 