An application of a small area procedure with correlation between measurement error and Eﬀects Assessment Project (CEAP) survey are useful for program development and evaluation. As a result of small county sample sizes, small area estimation procedures are needed. One variable that is related to sheet and rill erosion is the quantity of water runoﬀ. The runoﬀ is collected in the CEAP survey but is unavailable for the full population. We use an estimate of mean runoﬀ from the CEAP survey as a covariate in a small area model for sheet and rill erosion. The measurement error in the covariate is important, as is the correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. We conduct a detailed investigation of small area estimation in the presence of a correlation between the measurement error in the covariate and the sampling error in the response. The proposed methodology has a genuine need in CEAP, where the same survey that supplies the response also provides auxiliary information. In simulations, the proposed predictor is superior to small area predictors that assume the response and covariate are uncorrelated or that ignore the measurement error entirely. We conclude with practical recommendations. Abstract: County level estimates of mean sheet and rill erosion from the Conservation The Conservation Eﬀects Assessment Project (CEAP) is a survey that collects several types of soil and water depletion. An important response variable is sheet and rill erosion (soil loss due to ﬂow of water). Estimates of sheet and rill erosion for local areas, such as counties, can improve the eﬃciency of allocation of resources for conservation eﬀorts. Sample sizes in CEAP are too small to support reliable direct county estimates. Past analyses have explored a variety of issues that arise in the context of small area estimation using CEAP data (Erciulescu & Fuller 2016, Berg & Chandra 2014, Lyu et al. 2020, Berg & Lee 2019). CEAP response variables and are known for the full population of cropland of interest is diﬃcult. Use of variables collected in the CEAP survey as covariates is desirable for the purpose of simplifying data preparation. Furthermore, many of the factors that impact erosion are unavailable at the population level but are collected in the CEAP survey. One such variable is water runoﬀ. The runoﬀ is related to sheet and rill erosion but is unknown for the full population. area level model with sheet and rill erosion as the response. The covariate and response are both estimates from the CEAP survey. Therefore, the analysis should recognize not only the measurement error in the covariate but also the correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. error in the covariate is correlated with the sampling error in the response. The model of Ybarra (2003) is a generalization of Ybarra and Lohr (2008), where the measurement error is assumed uncorrelated with the sampling error. We build on the small area procedure of Ybarra (2003) for the purpose of the CEAP application. We conduct a detailed investigation of a small area procedure that recognizes the measurement error in the covariate as well as the correlation between the measurement error in the covariate and the sampling error in the response. A model that captures this correlation appropriately is needed for the CEAP data analysis because the covariate and response are estimators from the same survey. As discussed in Lyu et al. (2020), the task of obtaining covariates that are related to We use an estimate of mean water runoﬀ from the CEAP survey as a covariate in an Ybarra (2003) outlines a small area procedure for a model in which the measurement tion from censuses or administrative databases (Rao & Molina 2015, Pfeﬀermann 2013, Jiang & Lahiri 2006). A seminal model is the area-level Fay & Herriot (1979) model. A critical assumption underlying the Fay & Herriot (1979) predictor is that one can condition on the observed value of the covariate. If the covariate is an estimator from a sample survey, naive application of standard Fay-Herriot procedures can lead to erroneous inferences (Bell et al. 2019, Arima et al. 2017). Ybarra & Lohr (2008), Burgard et al. (2020), and Bell et al. (2019) extend the Fay-Herriot model to allow for measurement error in the covariate. These works assume that the measurement error is uncorrelated with the sampling error. The CEAP application requires a small area procedure that not only allows for measurement error in the covariate but also permits a nontrivial correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. ceived little attention in the small area estimation literature. Small area estimation procedures with measurement error use both structural and functional measurement error models (Fuller 2009, Carroll et al. 2006). In the structural model, the latent covariate is stochastic, while the functional model treats the unobserved covariate as ﬁxed. Applications of the structural measurement error model to small area estimation include Ghosh et al. (2006), Arima et al. (2012), Torabi et al. (2009), Torabi (2012), and Datta et al. (2018). The functional measurement error model is used in the context of unit-level small area procedures in Ghosh & Sinha (2007), Datta et al. (2010), and Torabi (2011). Ybarra & Lohr (2008) develop predictors for an area level model in which a covariate is subject to functional measurement error. Arima et al. (2015), Arima et al. (2017), and Burgard et al. (2021) build on the work of Ybarra & Lohr (2008). Burgard et al. (2020) conducts an analysis of the model of Ybarra & Lohr (2008) under the stronger assumption that the random terms have normal distributions. Bell et al. (2019) compare the properties of functional and structural measurement error models to the naive Fay-Herriot model. All of these works assume that the measurement error in the covariate and the sampling error in the response are uncorrelated. timators to be correlated. Franco & Bell (2019) deﬁne a bivariate model that is equivalent to Traditional small area estimation procedures utilize population-level auxiliary informa- Models in which the measurement error and the sampling error are correlated have re- Franco & Bell (2019) and Kim et al. (2015) deﬁne models that permit diﬀerent survey esa structural model with a correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. We adopt the functional modeling approach, which, unlike the structural model, requires no assumptions about the distribution of the latent covariate. Kim et al. (2015) conceptualize the parameter of interest as the unobserved value of a covariate that is measured with error. In contrast, we deﬁne the parameter to be the conditional mean of a response variable given a random eﬀect. We think that our formulation is more natural than that of Kim et al. (2015) in the context of small area estimation. We also deﬁne an estimator that is simpler to implement than the estimator of Kim et al. (2015). (2008) to allow for a correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. Ybarra (2003) does not fully develop the properties of the estimators and predictors for the case in which the measurement error is correlated with the sampling error. As in Ybarra & Lohr (2008), Ybarra (2003) focuses primarily on the case in which the measurement error and the sampling error are uncorrelated. measurement error and the sampling error builds Ybarra (2003). Ybarra (2003) derive a predictor as the minimum mean square error convex combination of a direct estimator and a linear combination of the observed covariate. We re-derive this predictor using properties of the multivariate normal distribution in Section 2.1. We propose estimators of the regression coeﬃcients in Section 2.2 that diﬀer from the estimators suggested in Ybarra (2003), and we study the theoretical properties of the proposed estimators. We also conduct extensive simulations to assess the properties of the proposed procedures under a wide variety of conditions in Section 3. Finally, we apply the proposed method to data from the CEAP survey in Section 4. This is a unique application, where the model with the correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error is needed. We conclude in Section 5. We deﬁne a Fay-Herriot model, where the measurement error in the covariate is correlated with the sampling error in the response. We denote the true, unknown value of the covariate Ybarra (2003) generalizes the functional measurement error model of Ybarra & Lohr Our detailed study of small area estimation in the presence of a correlation between the by x do not observe x W. In the common situation, W The measurement error is functional instead of structural because x quantity. The parameter of interest is where b representing observable quantities are then {(Y and (u that Ψ from the unit-level data using standard procedures for complex surveys. We parametrize Ψ The parameter Ψ pling error. We denote the ﬁxed vector of parameters which needs to be estimated as ω = (β estimation literature. The structure of the model in (1) is identical to the model of Ybarra (2003). The model in (1) assumes that the random terms are normally distributed, while Ybarra (2003) specify only ﬁrst and second moments. If Ψ simpliﬁes to the functional measurement error models of Ybarra & Lohr (2008) and Burgard et al. (2020). The structure of the model in (1) is also similar to the model of Kim et al. (2015). Kim et al. (2015) deﬁne the parameter of interest to be the unobserved covariate, x. In contrast, we deﬁne the parameter of interest θ = (x, . . . , x)for i = 1, . . . , n, where n is the total number of small areas. We ∼ N(0, σ) for i = 1, . . . , n. We let Ydenote an estimator of θ. The variables We deﬁne a model for (Y, W)as, , e)∼ MV N(0, Ψ), where (u, e) is independent of bfor i = 1, . . . , n. We assume is known. Typically, Ψis the design-variance of (W, Y), and Ψis constructed , β, σ). The objective is to predict the small area parameter θ. Remark 1: The model in (1) has strong connections to other models in the small area the parameter as the mean of the response is more natural to practitioners accustomed to small area modeling. This diﬀerence leads us to formulate the predictor and estimator of ω using approaches that diﬀer from the formulation in Kim et al. (2015). error (MSPE), where the MSPE is deﬁned as the expected squared diﬀerence between the predictor and θ We then deﬁne an estimator of ω in Section 2.2. Equipped with estimators of the model parameters, we deﬁne a predictor and MSPE estimator in Section 2.3. One can express the parameter of interest as θ parameter of interest as Y proceed to develop a form for ˆe We deﬁne a predictor of θand an associated estimator of the mean square prediction = βΨβ+ ψ− 2βΨ. A predictor of θis then predictor (3). A diﬀerent way to develop a predictor is to ﬁnd the convex combination of Y and β minimum MSPE convex combination of Y to the predictor proposed in Ybarra (2003). The development in (2) requires the normality assumption, while the development of the predictor in Ybarra (2003) uses only ﬁrst and second moments. We require estimators of β ing the sample moments with their theoretical expectations. Deﬁne ζ Theorem 1 of Appendix A states that the estimator of the regression coeﬃcients is consistent. For Theorem 1, we simplify and only consider a univaraite covariate. We outline the proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix A and provide further details in the supplementary material. of correlated errors, as in Ybarra (2003). Following Ybarra & Lohr (2008), one can deﬁne an estimator of σ A drawback of the estimator (5) is that it can be negative. When we apply the estimator (5) to the data of Section 4, we obtain a negative estimate. We therefore use the maximum likelihood objective function to deﬁne the estimator of σ Remark 2: We use the properties of the multivariate normal distribution to derive the + βWthat minimizes the MSPE. Ybarra (2003) develops the predictor (3) as the The estimator of σdeﬁned in Ybarra & Lohr (2008) can be easily adjusted to the case We give theoretical consideration to the properties of ˆσ 2 in Appendix A states that ˆσ 2 in the supplement. We tried this technique and found that the estimator based on the adjusted likelihood can have a positive bias in simulations. We therefore use the objective function (6) for our simulations and data analysis. Additionally, it may be possible to improve upon the estimator of regression coeﬃcients through an iterative procedure, similar to that of Kim et al. (2015). The beneﬁt of our proposed estimator is that it is simple and can be calculated in one step. It also has tractable theoretical properties, as we discuss in Appendix A. We evaluate the predictor (3) at the estimator of ω. We deﬁne the predictor as where dure of Section 2.2. The MSPE of accounts for the variance of Remark 3: For the estimation of σ, Li & Lahiri (2010) proposed an adjusted likelihood. ˆω = (ˆβ,ˆβ, ˆσ). The vector of estimated parametersˆω is obtained using the proce- MSP E(ˆθ) =E[(Y− ˆe(ˆω) − (Y− e))] The ﬁrst term, M(ω), is deﬁned in (4). The second term, M= E[(ˆe(ˆω) − ˆe(ω))], e)]. Suppose The ﬁnal equality holds because ˆe assumption that into a sum of two terms as We use a plug-in estimator of M where M the bias of jackknife estimator of M The estimator of the MSPE is then deﬁned as the bootstrap. For this model, Taylor linearization is possible, but the operations are tedious. We prefer the jackknife relative to Taylor linearization for simplicity of implementation. and parameter estimators. The procedures, however, do not rely heavily on the normality E[(ˆe(ˆω) − ˆe(ω))(ˆe(ω) − e)] = E[E[(ˆe(ˆω) − ˆe(ω))(ˆe(ω) − e) | v,ˆω]] Under the assumption that eis independent ofˆω given v, the MSPE ofˆθdecomposes (ω) is deﬁned in (4). We use the jackknife technique to estimate Mas well as Remark 4: Alternatives to the jackknife variance estimator are Taylor linearization and Remark 5: We have used the assumption of normality when formulating the predictor assumption. The development of the predictor in Ybarra (2003) as the optimal convex combination between the direct estimator and β parameter estimators remain consistent under suitable assumptions on the fourth moments. We conduct simulations with two goals. The ﬁrst is to understand the eﬀect of the nature of Ψ normality. We simulate data from normal distributions, as speciﬁed in model (1) in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. For the simulations of Section 3.1, we use unequal Ψ value of Ψ distributions in Section 3.3. We explain how we generate data from t distributions in Section 3.3. matrix, and β variables with 5 degrees of freedom. We set (β properties of the predictor, we deﬁne a general form for Ψ for j = 1, 2, 3, 4. We conduct simulations with equal and uneuqal Ψ with unequal Ψ For the simulations with equal Ψ sizes. First, we set (a, b, ρ) = (0.25, 0.75, 0.2). For this conﬁguration, the measurement error variance is smaller than the sampling variance, and the correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error is 0.2. We then increase the correlation and set (a, b, ρ) = (0.25, 0.75, 0.8). Next, we reverse a and b so that the measurement error variance exceeds the sampling variance. For the third and fourth choices of Ψ and (a, b, ρ) = (0.75, 0.25, 0.8). For each choice of Ψ on the properties of the predictor. The second is to assess eﬀects of departures from For both normal and t distributions, we use a univariate covariate so that Ψis a 2×2 As one of the simulation objectives is to understand the eﬀects of the form of Ψon the We deﬁne 8 simulation conﬁgurations by four combinations of (a, b, ρ) and two sample sizes of n = 100 and n = 500. For each of the 8 conﬁgurations, we conduct a Monte Carlo (MC) simulation with a MC sample size of 1000. procedure to two primary competitors. One competitor is the approach of Ybarra & Lohr (2008), which assumes that Cor(u procedure as “YL”. We implement estimation and prediction for the model of Ybarra & Lohr (2008) using the R package saeME. The other competitor is the standard estimator and predictor for the traditional Fay & Herriot (1979) model, abbreviated as “FH”. This competitor is of practical interest because naive application of the Fay-Herriot model when the covariate is from a sample survey is tempting for its simplicity. We implement estimation, prediction, and MSPE estimation for the standard Fay-Herriot model using the R package SAE. main reasons. One is that the predictor of Ybarra (2003) is not fully developed for the case of a correlation between the measurement error and the sampling error. The other is that we do not view the procedure of Ybarra (2003) as a competitor to our approach. Instead, our objective is to build on the predictor of Ybarra (2003) and study its properties in more detail. We expect the properties of the procedure outlined in Ybarra (2003) to be similar to the properties of the proposed procedure. We ﬁrst simulate data with normally distributed random components, as speciﬁed in model (1). We use the unequal Ψ predictors for the case of normal distributions and unequal Ψ We refer to the procedure proposed in Section 2 as ME-Cor. We compare the proposed We do not include the predictor outlined in Ybarra (2003) in the simulations for two Table 1: MC Means and standard deviations of estimators of ﬁxed model parameters. True values are (β the ﬁxed model parameters. The properties of the estimators are similar across the 8 conﬁgurations. At the sample size of n = 500, the proposed estimator (ME-Cor) is approximately unbiased for the intercept and slope. For n = 500, the MC bias of the proposed estimator Table 1 contains the MC means and standard deviations of the alternative estimators of of σ between u positive bias for the slope. The YL estimator of σ of a nonzero correlation between u zero to the estimator of σ reach the lower bound of zero. The measurement error attenuates the FH estimator of the slope toward zero and leads to a positive bias in the estimator of the intercept. The FH estimator of σ the measurement error. For some conﬁgurations, the correlation structure causes the FH estimator of σ estimators. The columns under the heading “MC MSPE of Predictor” contain the average MC MSPE’s of the alternative predictors. The columns under the heading “MC Mean Est. MSPE” contain the MC means of the MSPE estimators for the ME-Cor and FH procedures. The column labeled “Direct” indicates the MC MSPE of the direct estimator, Y For all but the conﬁguration with (a, b, ρ) = (0.25, 0.75, 0.2), the YL predictor has MC MSPE exceeding that of the direct estimator. The results for the YL predictor demonstrate the importance of accounting for a correlation between u and a < b (measurement error variance is smaller than the sampling variance), the FH predictor is superior to the direct estimator but inferior to the ME-Cor predictor. When ρ = 0.8 and a > b (measurement error exceeds the sampling error), the MC MSPE of the FH predictor exceeds the MC MSPE of the direct estimator. This empirical ﬁnding echoes a theoretical result in Ybarrah and Lohr (2008) that the Fay-Herriot predictor can have MSPE greater than the variance of the direct estimator if the covariate is measured with error. (FH-MSPE) has a severe negative bias for the MSPE of the Fay-Herriot predictor (FH). When a < b and ρ = 0.8, the MC mean of the FH MSPE estimator is more than an order of magnitude lower than the MC MSPE of the FH estimator. A risk of naive application is below 0.01 for each combination of (a, b, ρ). The presence of a nontrivial correlation Table 2 summarizes the empirical properties of the alternative predictors and MSPE The YL predictor is superior to the FH predictor but inferior to the ME-Cor predictor. The properties of the FH predictor are similar for n = 100 and n = 500. When ρ = 0.2 An important implication of measurement error is that the Fay-Herriot MSPE estimator of Fay-Herriot procedures in the presence of measurement error is under-estimation of the MSPE. conﬁgurations. When a < b, the gain in eﬃciency from the ME-Cor predictor relative to the direct estimator is greater for ρ = 0.2 than for ρ = 0.8. When a > b, the opposite pattern holds, as the ratio of the MC MSPE of the direct estimator to the MC MSPE of the ME-Cor predictor is greater for ρ = 0.8 than for ρ = 0.2. The ME-Cor procedure renders only trivial improvements in eﬃciency over the direct estimator for conﬁgurations with (a, b, ρ) = (0.25, 0.75, 0.8) or (a, b, ρ) = (0.75, 0.25, 0.2). Increasing n from 100 to 500 has little eﬀect on the properties of the ME-Cor predictor. of the ME-Cor predictor (ME-Cor). For each conﬁguration, the MC mean of the estimated MSPE for the ME-Cor predictor (ME-Cor-MSPE) is close to the MC MSPE of the MECor predictor (ME-Cor). The simulation results support the predictor and MSPE estimator proposed in Section 2. Table 2: MC MSPE’s of alternative predictors (MC MSPE of Predictor), and MC means of estimated MSPE’s of ME-Cor and FH predictors (MC Mean Est. MSPE). Normal distributions; unequal Ψ The ME-Cor predictor has smaller MC MSPE than the alternatives considered for all The proposed MSPE estimator (ME-Cor-MSPE) is a good approximation for the MSPE A special case in which one can ignore the measurement error occurs in the context of the structural model when the measurement error is uncorrelated with the sampling error and when the measurement error variance is constant. When the measurement error and sampling error are correlated, the naive Fay-Herriot predictor remains inappropriate, even if the measurement error variance is constant. In this sense, the impacts of measurement error on the properties of the naive Fay-Herriot predictor are especially important when the measurement error and sampling error are correlated. To illustrate this point, we present simulation results with equal Ψ is deﬁned in (10). We continue to simulate the errors from normal distributions. The conclusions for equal Ψ and YL estimators of the ﬁxed parameters remain biased when Ψ means of the proposed estimators of the ﬁxed parameters are close to the true parameter values. In Table 4, the proposed predictor has smaller MC MSPE than the alternatives for all conﬁgurations and sample sizes. The Fay-Herriot predictor remains ineﬃcient when case of equal Ψ predictor. Tables 3 and 4 contain simulation results for Ψ= Ψfor i = 1, . . . , n, where Ψ = Ψ. Also, the FH estimator of the MSPE continues to have a negative bias in the Table 3: MC Means and standard deviations of estimators of ﬁxed model parameters. True values are (β Table 4: MC MSPE’s of alternative predictors (MC MSPE of Predictor), and MC means of estimated MSPE’s of ME-Cor and FH predictors (MC Mean Est. MSPE). Normal distributions, equal Ψ We next simulate data from t distributions. This allows us to assess robustness of the procedure to departures from normality. To simulate data from t distributions, we ﬁrst generate ˜u denotes a t distribution with 5 degrees of freedom divided by standardizes the variables so that ˜u ˜e, and the square root matrix of Ψ combinations of (a, b, ρ). ˜bare mutually independent. We then deﬁne (u, e)= Ψ(˜u, ˜e), where Ψis Table 5: MC Means and standard deviations of estimators of ﬁxed model parameters. True values are (β Table 6: MC MSPE’s of alternative predictors (MC MSPE of Predictor), and MC means of estimated MSPE’s of ME-Cor and FH predictors (MC Mean Est. MSPE). t distributions; unequal Ψ the MC means and standard deviations of the estimators of the ﬁxed parameters when the random terms are generated from t distributions. Table 6 contains the MC MSPE’s of the predictors as well as the MC means of the estimated MSPE’s for the proposed and FayHerriot predictors. The results for the t distribution are very similar to the results for the normal distribution. The proposed estimators of the ﬁxed parameters remain approximately unbiased when the random terms are generated from t distributions. In contrast, the FH and YL procedures continue to give biased estimators of ω when the random terms are generated from t distributions. As seen in Table 6, the proposed predictor has smaller MC MSPE than the alternatives. The proposed MSPE estimator is a good approximation for the MSPE of the predictor, even when the data are generated from t distributions. The results for the t distribution support the statement in remark 2 that the predictor and MSPE estimator are robust to the assumption of normality. The results for the t distribution are presented in Tables 5 and 6. Table 5 contains We apply the method proposed in Section 2 to predict mean log sheet and rill erosion in Iowa counties using CEAP data. In CEAP, sheet and rill erosion is measured using a computer model called RUSLE2. A variable that impacts the amount of sheet and rill erosion in a county is the quantity of water runoﬀ. The mean runoﬀ is unknown for the full population of cropland in Iowa. We use the sample mean of runoﬀ obtained from the CEAP survey as the covariate for the small area model. The response is the log of the sample mean of RUSLE2. Because the runoﬀ and RUSLE2 are both estimators from the same survey, we require the methodology from Section 2. denote the direct estimator of mean RUSLE2 erosion in county i, where i = 1, . . . , n. Let mean runoﬀ for county i is denoted by ˜x model is deﬁned by Y x= log(˜x axis. The positive, linear association in the plot is consistent with the linearity assumption in model (1). We connect the context and notation of Section 2 to the CEAP data analysis. Let˜Y denote the direct estimator of the mean runoﬀ for county i. The unknown population We deﬁne the small area model in the log scale. The response variable for the small area is a contaminated measurement of the log of the population mean runoﬀ, deﬁned as Figure 1: Scatterplot of Y design variance of (W where a result of the smoothing, the estimate of Cor(u The estimate of Cor(u error variance is smaller than the estimate of the variance of the sampling error for the CEAP data. The ratio of the estimate of V (u the measurement error is smaller than the sampling error, naive application of Fay-Herriot procedures has the potential to under-estimate the MSPE. interest θ use the procedure of Section 2.2 to estimate the parameters of model (1). We construct predictors of θ The model requires an estimate of Ψ, the design variance of (W, Y). We estimate the ˜Ψ is a smoothed estimate of the within-county variance deﬁned in Appendix B. As We assume that the model (1) holds for (W, Y) for i = 1, . . . , n. The parameter of Table 7 contains the estimate of ω = (β, β, σ) for the CEAP data. The standard errors are the square roots of the diagonal elements of the jackknife covariance matrix deﬁned as The magnitude of the estimate of each parameter is more than double the corresponding standard error. Table 7: Estimates of ﬁxed model parameters and associated standard errors for CEAP data. to the square roots of the estimated mean square prediction errors (RMSPE) for the proposed predictors (green). For the CEAP data analysis, three of the estimated MSPE’s are negative. We therefore apply a lower bound to the estimated MSPE for the CEAP analysis. We deﬁne the MSPE estimator for the CEAP study by where substantial. The RMSPE of the predictor is less than the SE of the direct estimator for every county. The strong trend in the plot is due to the smoothing of the sampling covariance matrix. The average ratio of the RMSPE of the predictor to the SE of the direct estimator is 0.695. Figure 2 contains a barplot comparing the standard errors of the direct estimators (red) ˆMSP Eis deﬁned in (9). The estimated eﬃciency gains from small area modeling are Figure 2: Barplot of standard errors of direct estimators (red) with estimated root mean square prediction errors (RMSPE) of predictors (green). Counties are sorted in ascending order by sample size. We conduct an extensive study of the properties of a small area predictor that allows for a correlation between the measurement error in the covariate and the sampling error in the response. The procedure is required for the CEAP application, where the same survey that provides the response also supplies auxiliary information. We use runoﬀ as a covariate for predicting mean log sheet and rill erosion. The mean runoﬀ and mean sheet and rill erosion are both estimates from the CEAP survey. Therefore, the correlation between the measurement error in runoﬀ and the sampling error in sheet and rill erosion is important. surement error and the sampling error. Our work expands on Ybarra (2003) in several dimensions. The estimator of the ﬁxed parameters that we propose diﬀers slightly from the estimator suggested in Ybarra (2003). We conduct simulations comparing alternative predictors under a wide variety of conditions. We also provide software for implementing the Ybarra (2003) presents a predictor for a model with a correlation between the measimulations at https://github.com/emilyjb/SAE-Correlated-Errors/. We apply the methods to CEAP data, an application where the methodology presented in this paper is essential. of naively applying the Fay-Herriot predictor when the covariate and response are estimators from the same survey. Importantly, the MSPE estimator for the Fay-Herriot model has a severe negative bias for the MSPE of the predictor. The problems with the Fay-Herriot predictor persist when Ψ the Fay-Herriot model if the covariate is obtained from a sample survey. ulations, the proposed predictor is more eﬃcient than the alternatives, and the proposed MSPE estimator provides a reasonable approximation for the MSPE of the predictor. The eﬃciency of the proposed method relative to the direct estimator depends on the nature of Ψ are minimal. The methodology presented in this paper may be most useful to practitioners working with data sets for which the variance of the sampling error exceeds the measurement error variance. runoﬀ as a covariate in a small area model for sheet and rill erosion. The runoﬀ varies less within a county than does sheet and rill erosion. As a result, substantial gains in eﬃciency from small area prediction are observed in the data analysis. The runoﬀ is a useful predictor of sheet and rill erosion, and runoﬀ is only available from the CEAP survey. Without the methodology presented in this paper, the use of runoﬀ as a covariate would be impossible. We provide a theoretically sound estimation procedure for use in conjunction with the simple practice of using estimators from related surveys as covariates and response variables. The methodology has potential use in a wide range of applications in the area of oﬃcial statistics. One of our important contributions is that the simulation studies illustrate the dangers The proposed predictor rectiﬁes the problems with the Fay-Herriot predictor. In sim- . If Cor(u, e) is small and V (u) > V (e), then the gains from small area modeling The patterns in the simulation study are reﬂected in the CEAP data analysis. We use The methodology presented in this paper is of general interest beyond the CEAP study. We state and prove Theorems 1 and 2 for the case of univariate x we parametrize Ψ Then, ( vector ζ By the law of large numbers and assumptions A.1-A.4, ζ g is a continuous function on a closed set containing ζ follows from the continuous mapping theorem. We present a more rigorous proof in the supplementary material. Theorem 1: Assume the following assumptions hold: (c, c, c, c, c, c, c, c, c), where 0 < c< ∞ for k = 1, . . . , 9. − µ6= 0. Proof: One can express (ˆβ,ˆβ) as g(ζ, ζ, ζ, ζ), where ζis the univariate version of the deﬁned in Section 2.2. Let ζdenote the probability limit of ζfor k = 1, 2, 3, 4. Theorem 2: Let ω = (ω, ω, ω)= (β, β, σ)and letˆω = (ˆω, ˆω, ˆω)= (ˆβ,ˆβ, ˆσ). where v and where D second derivatives, respectively. Then ˆσ county as a simple random sample. We let j = 1, . . . , n for county i. We let ˜y element j in county i. Then, we deﬁne ( of the within-county variance for county i by where ˜v the sampling variance of The diagonal elements of Σ transformation, the diagonal elements of = Y−β−βW. Assume that for (ω, ω, ω) in a closed set containing (β, β, σ), Proof: See the supplementary material. We explain how we estimate Ψfor the CEAP data. We treat the CEAP sample for a = ( ˜w, ˜y)and¯˜v= n( ˜w, ˜y). By the delta method, an estimator of ,˜Y). We therefore deﬁne a pooled estimate of the within-county variance ofn(W, Y)