Newsletters have (re-) emerged as a powerful tool for publishers to engage with their readers directly and more eectively. Despite the diversity in their audiences, publishers’ newsletters remain largely a one-size-ts-all oering, which is suboptimal. In this paper, we presentNU:BRIEF, a web application for publishers that enables them to personalize their newsletters without harvesting personal data. Personalized newsletters build a habit and become a great conversion tool for publishers, providing an alternative readersgenerated revenue model to a declining ad/clickbait-centered business model. Demo:https://demo.nubrief.com/md03PaAJSwXMegL5BbKpQlA rK3elb3hDUglcHodx4gE=/ Explainer video:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUZGuyP JYH4 • Information systems ! Recommender systems;• Computing methodologies ! Machine learning. Newsletter Personalization, AI, Federated Learning, ML, NLP, Privacy, Personalized Ranking ACM Reference Format: Ernesto Diaz-Aviles, Claudia Orellana-Rodriguez, Igor Brigadir, and Reshma Narayanan Kutty. 2021.NU:BRIEF– A Privacy-aware Newsletter Personalization Engine for Publishers. In Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys ’21), September 27-October 1, 2021, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3460231.3478884 Newsletters are an attractive way for publishers to quickly build an audience and convert people into paying subscribers within weeks. For publishers, newsletters have become a viable revenue stream and an alternative to a declining click-bait business model. For example, the New York Times has about 15 million subscribers across its 71 newsletters compared to 6.69 million digitalonly subscriptions. In total, readers opened more than 3.6 billion newsletter emails from the publisher in 2020. The New York Times reports that digital revenue overtook print revenue, and digital subscriptions was its largest revenue stream. [6, 13] However, the accelerated growth observed by major outlets such as the New York Times requires large amounts of resources for newsletter development, such as, an interdisciplinary team of technical sta, editorial specialists, and project managers. For small to medium publishers or independent writers with a limited budget, it is nearly impossible to tap on resources like these to maintain a diverse choice of newsletters. Their option is to settle on the better-than-nothing alternative to send the same newsletter to their diverse audience. This is suboptimal and clearly not on a growth path as the one reported by major media publishers. Small to mid size publishers, however, do not have the legacy of a heavy machinery of old-line publishers, but have a better chance to innovate faster and start op erating more like a digital product and technology company. One can observe the emergence of Neo-Media players serving and delighting audiences neglected by old-media that forgot their readers in exchange for minimal commission on click-bait ads served alongside their content. One key characteristic of these new players is that they are more respectful of reader privacy as a conse quence of the relationship and trust they are looking to establish with their readers, who are increasingly privacyconscious. In addition, publishers do not want the risk and liability of collecting and storing personal information given the intense scrutiny from data regulators. NU:BRIEF, the tool we introduce in this work, enables publishers to monetize quality journalism by personalizing the newsletter experience for readers without the risk of collecting personal identiable information, thereby moving away from a volatile advertising business.NU:BRIEFuses AI based on Machine Learning to automatically segment the publishers’ audience into cohorts based on ComputeSegment content and extraction, and embeddings user audience Automatic Text from article text into cohorts of Summarization to and metadatasimilar interestfacilitate their interests and to produce a newsletter for each cohort with interesting articles tailored to the users’ taste in each of these groups, without harvesting personal identiable information or selling it to third parties. In the rest of the paper, we introduce user stories to give context on how publishers are currently usingNU:BRIEFto achieve their goals, we provide a technical overview of the system implementation, and present preliminary results on the online tests conducted. Let us introduce two user stories to illustrate the scenarios in which NU:BRIEF can assist publishers to personalize their newsletters. User Story 1. “As an editor, I want to be able to sele ct a short list of interesting articles from a set of candidates about a theme of interest, so I can write an introduction about the theme and include my article selection in our weekly newsletter.” User Story 2. “As an editor, I want to be able to rank (with the most relevant rst) the articles we wrote this week to better inform and make our audience happy, so I can include them in our weekly newsletter.” Figure 1 showsNU:BRIEF’s main pipeline. We detail each component as follows. Vector as a Service (VaaS).VaaSis responsible for computing vector representations, i.e., embeddings, from the text content of articles and its metadata. These embeddings are latent features extracted automatically using pre-trained NLP large language models based on transformers [3,7,12]. The standard ow is that articles from publishers usingNU:BRIEFare initially processed oine during publisher onboarding. The articles are also indexed and the Select a set of and compute a rankings and candidate short list of additional articles for a personalized information so given theme recs. for each she can curate embedding is stored. New articles are processed periodically during the day, e.g., every 15m, to keep a cache system and index up to date. Segmentation Service. This component is responsible for discovering, initially from the content, a set of cohorts of interest. The rationale is that publishers write articles for a diverse audience and the topics of their production reect the diversity of their target readers. We use k-means clustering [9] to this end and the embeddings output by theVaaScomponent as input. We have found that for publishers currently usingNU:BRIEFa typical number of clusters (cohorts)kranges between 4 and 6, which is determined based on clustering metrics such as silhouette coecient and a qualitative assessment. XAI/NLP Service. The goal of this component is to enrich the articles with additional information that can help editors, and readers, understand why a particular article is recommended. To this end, it extracts named entities, keywords, and automatic summaries from the articles.NU:BRIEFalso computes embeddings usingVaaS for these additional text elements and caches them to be used in later stages of the pipeline. NU:BRIEFcomputes two automatic summaries, one abstractive and one extractive using transformers-based NLP models [8,15]. In abstractive summarization the machine summarizes in its ‘own’ words what the article is about using language generation techniques, that is, the output concise text might not appear exactly in the input article. In contrast, extractive summarization identies salient information in the article, which is then extracted and grouped together to form a concise summary. Both summaries are presented to the editor in the user interface. Candidate Retrieval Service. This service is responsible for indexing articles, their metadata, and embeddings. It is implemented as a search engine that assists, in production, the selection of a subset of candidate articles relevant to a specic theme or context. These candidate articles are the ones to be re-ranked by theRaaS component to compute the p ersonalized recommendations. This component is critical during inference since the cardinality of the candidates subset is signicantly smaller than the whole set of articles indexed. Privacy-aware Recommender as a Service (RaaS). One of our design principles forNU:BRIEFis to develop a recommender system service that is private-by-default, compliant with privacy regulations, and oers a high quality personalization. As part of this goal, NU:BRIEFcomputes an aggregate representation of a user’s taste (taste vector) based on their history interactions (e.g., clicks) with the recommended content. Dierential privacy [5], e.g., data perturbation, is applied in this step for additional privacy guarantees. The core recommender system engine uses a hybrid approach of content-based [1], matrix factorization collaborative ltering [4,10] and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [14]. In our experience, deep learning architectures have served us well in production for learning representations from text and in the XAI pipeline, e.g., automatic summarization, but we have found that relatively simple recommender system algorithms, e.g., embedding based models and dot product operations on those embeddings to compute scores, have proven very practical to deploy in production and have performed well in live tests. In addition, oine evaluations we have conducted show that these methods have not been inferior to neural-based models for recommendation, which is in line with recent studies, e.g., [2,11]. We are currently experimenting with Deep and Cross Network [17] architectures and with attention mechanisms [16] to improve model interpretability guided by high-level journalistic features. As a side product of our recommender technology, we generate privacy-preserving analytics which can inform how cohorts of users interact with content in dierent contexts and scenarios, without singling out or exposing any individual. User Interface.NU:BRIEFuser interface is shown in Figure 2. It is designed so that the newsletter editor fullls the user stories presented in Section 1. There are three basic steps: (i) dene newsletter theme using phrases or keywords, (ii) specify a time range for candidate articles to consider, and (iii) receive personalized recommendations per cohort of interest.NU:BRIEFversions in production also oer an export to html functionality for publishers so they can include the selected articles recommended into their newsletter distribution system. Over the rst half of 2021, we have conducted a pilot test in a private beta with small-to-medium publishers whose content covers topics ranging from technology, STEM, startups, local news, and food recipes. These publishers serve a combined audience of more than 43K subscribers for their newsletters. In total,NU:BRIEFpipeline has processed 135K documents published by the pilot publishers. The main lessons learne d from A/B tests conducted usingNU:BRIEF are as follows. (i) Personalized rankings per cohort compute d by NU:BRIEFperform at the same level as the ones curated by a human editor. That is, newsletters produced based onNU:BRIEFrankings achieve opening rates and CTR that are equivalents to the ones achieved by the ones curated entirely manually by a journalist. (ii) Publishers report that time to curate a newsletter drops from one hour to 10 minutes when usingNU:BRIEF(80% time savings). (iii) The conversion rate from newsletter readers to paying subscribers increases with the personalization options oered by NU:BRIEF. In this work, we have given an overview of our approach,NU:BRIEF, towards building a private-by-default, personalized newsletter recommender engine.NU:BRIEFproduces a ranked list of recommendations per segment (cohort) of common interest to assist editors in newsletter curation. As private-by-default recommender systems do not exist o-the-shelf, our work will allow publishers to provide personalized newsletters without violating privacy regulations, and allow users to nd content they enjoy without sacricing their private data. This work is supported by Enterprise Ireland grant no. CS20191123, a project co-funded by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under Ireland’s European Structural and Investment Funds Programme 2014-2020.