Astronomy & Astrophysics October 26, 202 1 Alvin Gavel, Pieter G ruyters, Ulrike Heiter, Andreas J. Korn Observational Astrophysics, Division of Astr onomy and Space Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia ARC Centre of Excellence for All Sky Astrophysics in 3 Dimensions (ASTRO 3D) Laboratoire Univers et Particules de Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France Received 9 March 2021 / accepted 24 May 2021 stellar atmospheres. dances of Mg, Ti, Fe, and Ba in stars in the metal-poor globular cluster M30. To the abundances we ﬁt trends of abundances predicted by stellar evolution models assuming diﬀerent eﬃciencies of additional transport or mixing processes. The ﬁtting procedure attempts to take into account the eﬀects of parameter-dependent systematic errors in the derived abundances. be constrained to the narrow range log(T/ [K])between 6.09 and 6.2. This corresponds to decreased abundances for stars at the main sequence turn-oﬀ point compared to the red giant branch by 0.2 dex for Mg, 0.1 dex for Fe, and 0.07 dex for Ti. We also ﬁnd that while our estimates do have non-negligible systematic errors stemming from the continuum placement and the assumed microturbulence, our method can take them into account. log(T/ [K])= 6.0 when modelling the Spite plateau of lithium. To more easil y distinguish physical eﬀects from systematic errors, we recommend that studies of this kind focus on elements for which the expected surface abundances as functions of eﬀective temperature have a dist inct structure and cover a wide range. spectroscopic To ﬁrst approximation, one might expect the atmospheres of the stars in a stellar cluster to have identical elemental abundances: They for med from the collapse of a chemically almost homogeneous gas cloud, and the outer layers of a star are mostly unaﬀected by nucleosynthesis. Closer inspection has shown that this is not quite true: The assumptio ns that cluster stars form from chemically identical gas and that nucleosynthesis has no eﬀect on observed abundances, are both violated in some circumstances. Th e re are also several processes that cause e le ments to sepa rate by de pth in the stellar atmosphere. This paper focuses on constraining a parameter that describe s one of those processes. The assumption that the stars in a cluster are formed from chemically homogeneous gas would be true if they all formed at exactly th e same time. In reality, the formation of a stellar cluster takes time, and by the time the last stars fo rm, several of the ﬁrst stars have already reac hed the end of their evolution and have polluted the remaining gas. This cau ses the phe- Based on data collected at the ESO telescopes under programme 099.D-0748(A) , Thomas Nordlander, Kilian H. Scheutwinkel, and nomenon of anticorrelations in stellar clusters, where increased abundances of certain elements are statistically correlated with lowered abundances of others, such as Mg with Al and Na with O (Gratton et al. 2001). Such anticorrelations were ﬁrst described in Cohen (1978), and in Carretta (2 006) they were deﬁnitively shown to be cor related with the o rbital parameters of the stars. This led to the hypo thesis that the anticorrelations somehow reﬂect chemical conditions at the site of formation, which in turn a re probably mostly aﬀected by material ejected from the ﬁrst generation of stars. The assumption that nucleosynth e sis does not aﬀec t surface abundances is viola ted in giant branch stars through the pro c ess of dredge-up, in which the convective envelope reaches deep enoug h into th e star to start pulling up materials pr oduced by core hydrogen burning. However, this mainly aﬀects the isotopic ratios of C, N, and O and the abundanc es of Li and Be (Pagel 2009), none of which we measure in the main part of this study. Several diﬀerent processes cause elements to separate with depth in the stellar atmosphere. Some o f these pr ocesses are well understood and some are still not. The conceptually simplest are the diﬀusive processes. Over long timescales, the re are two dominant processes that tend to cause diﬀerent species to drift vertically in a macroscopically stationary region of a stellar atmosphere: There is the tendency for gravity to pull heavier species downwards, referred to as ‘gravitational settling’. On the other hand, there is the tendency for radiation to push more opaq ue species upwards, referred to as ‘radiative acceleration’. In models of old metal-poor stars, gravitational settling tends to be strongest, creating an overall tendency to lower the abundances of metals in the outer layers of the atmosphere, except for some elements that undergo signiﬁcant levitation around the turn-oﬀ point (TOP). The separation of elements is counteracted b y macroscopic vertical mass ﬂows – that is, convection (Michaud 1970; Richard et al. 2001). Based on observations, it is known that warm stars have noticeably lower abundances than giant stars. Based on modelling, th is is thought to be because warm stars have smaller convective envelopes, while giant stars have large convective envelopes that keep their abundances close to the origina l values. An overview of this topic is given in the ﬁrst paper in this article series, Korn et al. (2007). However, there appears to be at least one more mech anism that aﬀects the separation of elements in the atmosphere. If only the diﬀusive processes described above, together with convection wer e imp ortant, we would expect to see much stronger trends in abundances as a function o f eﬀective temperature than have actually been observed in stellar clusters (Korn et al. 2007). This implies that some other transpor t process of chemical species is counteracting the eﬀects of diﬀusion (Michaud et al. 1976; Richard et al. 20 01). The most conspicuous case is lithium, for which there is a wide range of T, called the ‘Spite plateau’, for which abundan ces are almost constant (Spite & Spite 1982; Richard et al. 2002). In this series of papers, we refer to this mechanism as the ‘add itional transpor t or mixing process’ (AddMix). Most other papers use the term ‘turbulent mixing’ instead. AddMix should not be confused with the term ‘extra mixing’, w hich is sometimes used for the unrelated process o f thermohaline mixing (Ulrich 1972). As the vague name is meant to emphasise, the physical mechanism of AddMix is currently not well understood (Richer et al. 2 000). It ha s been suggested that it might involve mass loss and rotationally induced mixing (Michaud et al. 198 3; Proﬃtt & Michaud 1991; Vick et al. 2013). Essentially, stellar evolution models inco rporating Ad dMix postulate the existence of some sort of turbulent mixing process parametrised in terms of a turbulent diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, deﬁned as where the p roportionality co nstant ω is a real number, the exponen t n is some integer, ρ is density at a given temperature, Tis a reference temp erature and D(T)is th e atomic diﬀusion coeﬃcient of He at the temperature T(Richer et al. 2000; Richard et al. 2005). We n ote that while Dis included in (1), based on the physical assumptions made by the modellers, we could be agnostic about what AddMix actually is and treat ωD(T)as simply being a generic coeﬃcient with dimen sio ns of area divided by time. Since we lack a fundamental physical mod el to d erive them from ﬁrst princ iples, the parameters in Dhave to be determined empirically by ﬁtting model predictions to observations. This has been done by several diﬀerent studies, including the article series that this paper is part of. Fitting to observed abundances of L i, Be, and B in the Sun has led to the adop tion of n = 3. This simultaneously leads to adopting the proportionality ω = 400 (Proﬃtt & Micha ud 1991; Richard et al. 2002, 2005). Article number, page 2 of 20 The parameter Tstill needs to be further constrained. By convention, we la bel AddMix models in terms of log(T/ [K]). This is usually done in a sh orthand such that T5 .9 sho uld be read as ‘the model f or which log(T/ [K])= 5.9’. The third paper in this article series – Nordlander et al. (2012), henceforth called ‘Paper III’ – arrived at T6.0 for the metal-poor cluster NGC 6397. The sixth paper in th is article series – Gruyters et al. (2016), henceforth called ‘Paper VI ’ – adopted this value for M30 (NGC-7099), based on their similar metallicities, but noted that T5.8 provided a better ﬁt to their derived abundances. The main goal of this ar ticle is to provide a more accurate estimate of Tby compa ring abundance trends predicted for different values of Tto derived abundances for M30. To do this we must also address a problem with interpreting derived a bundances: All abundance estimates are aﬀected by systematic errors, which depend to some extent on stellar parameters such as T. This means that any measured trend will be a diﬃcult-todisentangle mixture of systematics and the ac tual physical trend. We have occasionally even encountered scepticism as to what extent me asured abundance tre nds even measure anything other than the systematics of the measu rement method. Hence, secondary objectives of the article are to develop a well-deﬁned method for constraining systematic uncertainties, to then use this to deﬁnitively show that diﬀusion processes do have measurable eﬀects, and to clarify how well Tcan be constrained when systematics are taken into acc ount. We have photometric and spe ctroscopic observations of 177 stars in the globular cluster M30. The cluster has bee n selected on the basis that it is very metal-poor, with [M/H] = −2.35, and relatively little studied. Since it is 6 kpc below the Galactic plane (Goldsbury et al. 2010), it has the fairly low reddening of E(B − V)= 0.03 ±0.01 mag (Kains et al. 2013, 2016). Together with the clusters NGC 6397, NGC 6752 and M4, which have previously been studied in this article series, it forms a sequence of [M/H] from −2.35 to −1, which allows us to probe AddM ix as a function of overall metallicity. M30 also has the advantage of being far above the galactic plane, minimising the eﬀect of Galactic reddening. The stars had previo usly been observed with VI broadband photometry by Peter Stetson (Stetson 2000, 2005). This was used to estimate the stellar parameters needed for abundance de termination, as described in Sect. 4.3. A colou r-magnitude diagram can be found in Paper VI ( Gruyters et al. 2016, Fig. 1). The Fibre Large Arr ay Multi Element Spectrograph (FLAMES) is a spe c trograph connected to the second Unit Telescope (UT2) at the Very Large Telescope (VLT) facility (Pasquini et al. 2002). This feeds the GIRAFFEspectrograph. The spectra have a resolution λ/∆λ = 23 000 and were taken with an exposure time around 2775 s. They were observed in the HR6 mode, which covers the wavelength range 4538-4760 Å. They were observed as part of projec t 099.D-0748(A) with principal investigator Despite customarily being spelled in uppercase, the name is not an acronym. Fig. 1: Isochrone used in the T6.09 model, together with the T, log g, and [M/H] of the individual stars estimated as described in Sect. 4.3. Pieter Gruyters. Several spec tra were taken of each star, typically around 30 for faint stars and around 5 for bright stars. We give a full list of the stars in Table B.2. For each star, the observed spectra were coadded into a sin gle spectrum. As described in Appen dix A, this was done before correcting for radial velocity, and also required the removal of sky ﬂux. After this the spectra were visually inspected, and those with issues likely to prevent a me aningful abundance determination were ﬂagged and removed from further analysis. For the abundance derivation we further co-added the spectra for individual stars into group spectra of stars with similar stellar parameters, as described in App endix B. We computed stellar evolution models, inc luding atomic diffusion (with radiative acceler ations) and AddMix as described by Eq. (1), using the Montréal/Mon tpellier stellar evolution code (Turcotte et al. 1998; Rich er et al. 2000; Richard et al. 2001). These were used to compute isochrones describing the evolutionary variation in surface chemical compo sition, giving us expected abundances as fu nctions of eﬀective temperature calculated for six discrete Tvalues: T5.8, T5.9, T5.95, T6.0, T6.09, and T6.2, assuming a cluster age of 13.5 Gy. With this range, we samp le th e range of diﬀusion models used in previous papers of this series, as well as those that are compatible with the empirica l constraints arising from a thin and ﬂat Spite plateau – notwithstanding the slight r ise in lithium in subgiants prior to the onset of the ﬁrst dredge-up as observed in N G C 6397, (Korn et al. 2006; Korn et al. 2007; Lind et al. 2009). We show the isochrone in Table 1 together with the estimated stellar parameters of the individual stars, which have been estimated as de scribed in Sect. 4.3. Previous tests have shown that the isochrones are able to reproduce the colour-magnitud e diagram of M92 (NGC 6341), which has similar metallicity to M30 (VandenBerg et a l. 2002). In these models, the vertical stratiﬁcation of chemical composition is fo llowed for the elements that have known radiative cross-sections, and evolutionary variations are thus predicted for those elements (Riche r et al. 1998). This includes Fe, Ti, and Mg, which our spectra con tain lines fro m. Radiative crosssections, and hence model predictions, are not available for Ba, which prevented us fro m ﬁtting to our abundance estimates of that element. We discuss this element in Appen dix E. We show the predicted trends, together with our derived abundances (see Sect. 4), for Mg in Fig. 3, for Ti in Fig. 5, and for Fe in Fig. 6. For Fe and Mg, the expectation is that the abundance should incre ase with decreasing eﬀective temperature, while the expectation for Ti is that it should drop and then rise, with a sharper rise the lower T. This would seem to make the Ti trend the easiest to distinguish, but the trend is also much weaker than the trends expected for the other elements. To derive abundances for individual spectra, we use a pipeline based on the spectral synthesis code Spectroscopy Made Easy (SME), describ e d in Sect. 4.4.1. The pipeline is similar to the pipeline for determining stellar parameters describe d in Gavel et al. (2019). We presen t abundances using what is informally known as the ‘12-scale’. That is, we show where x is some ele ment, Nis the number density of the element, and Nis the number density of hydrogen. The a lgorithm work s by ﬁtting a synthetic spectrum to the observed spectrum. This is done in a wavelength segment around the line in question that has been chosen to be wide enough to allow a reliable continuum determinatio n. The ﬁtting is done over a wavelength segmen t covering the line. The ﬁtting involves three steps. The ﬁrst step is cleaning of contamina nts: Before looking a t the observed spec trum, we ge nerate two mode l spectra: One that contain s spectral lines for a ll elements, and one that contains only spectral lines for the element that we intend to ﬁt. Pixels f or which the estimated ﬂuxes diﬀer by more than 0.005 a re ﬂagged as contaminated, and do not get used in the ﬁtting. The second step is normalisation: The c ontinuum level of the observed spectrum is estimated , as described in Sect. 4.4.1. The ﬁnal step is ﬁtting: The model spectrum is ﬁtted to the observed spectrum by minimising a χlike goodness-of-ﬁt metric, as described in Sect. 4.4.1. Both the abundance of the element in question, and a Gaussian broadening p arameter, are free parameters in the ﬁt. The broadening parameter is mostly intended to capture the eﬀects of macroturbulence at the depth of line formation, but can also capture other physical and instrumental eﬀects. The wavelength region covered by our spectra is relatively linepoor. While this has the beneﬁt of decreasing the numb e r of contamina nts, it gave us relatively few lines to work with. We selected one line of Fe, one line of Mg, two lines of Ti, and one line of Ba, shown in Table 1 together with line mask s as de scribed in Sect. 4.4.1 and log g f values. The lines are taken from the Gaia-ESO line list described in Heiter et al. (2021), which in turn uses values from Ralchenko et al. (2010), Pickering et al. (2001), Wo od et al. (2013), Kurucz (2013) and Miles & Wiese (1969). As a sh orthand, we will ref e r to the lines as Mg4 702, Ti4563, Ti4571, Fe4583, and Ba4554, respectively. In the main body of this ar ticle we only study Mg4702, Ti4563, and Fe4583, but we discuss Ti4571 and Ba4554 in Appendix E. We note that the Fe II line at 4583.8292 Å overlaps with a weaker Fe I line at 4583.7195 Å. The blend was taken into account in our main analysis, but was not treated completely c onsistently in the 3D analysis described in Appendix D. We estimated abundances using spectral ﬁtting. This required some e stima te s of the stellar parameters e ﬀective tempe rature T, surface gravity log g, and metallicity [M/H] – and in most cases also microturbulence v. As described in Sect. 4.1, we used a single broaden ing parameter to capture the combined eﬀects of macro turbulence, stellar rotation, and in strumental broade ning – the last of which is expected to dominate. Tand log g were determined by projecting the stars onto Victoria iso c hrones ( VandenBerg et a l. 2014). In Paper VI, Stetson’s V magnitude and V − I colour of the 150 stars studied in that a rticle were used to ﬁt a 13.4 Gyr, [M/H] = −2.3 isochrone for M30. We show our estimated T, log g, and [M/H] (described below) in Fig. 1, together with the stellar isochrone used in model T6.0 9. There is a slight inconsistency between the isochrone used for the pa rameter estimates and that f or the stellar evolution model. To the extent that this matters, it may introduce a slight tendency to un derestimate the abundance d iﬀerence betwe en hot and co ld stars. Paper VI also compared Victoria isochrones to BaSTI (Pietrinferni e t al. 2013) and Dartmouth isochrones (Dotter et al. 2008) and found that only the Victoria isochrones were ca pable of reproducing the observed morphology of the cluster (Gruy ters et al. 2016, Sect. 3.1). In Appendix C we investigate the eﬀect of a possible oﬀset in Tand the resulting shifts in log g and v. The overall metallicity [M/H] for each star was determined using spectral synthesis methods similar to those used in this paper. We note that [M/H] is not crucial to our analysis: Our spectral synthesis code (described in Sect. 4.4.1) requires so me assumed overall me tallicity, but the result of ﬁtting an abundance to a speciﬁc line should ide ally not depend on this assumption. The only way it should be able to aﬀect our abundance estimates is if the lines we used to measure abundances are blended with lines of other elements, which in turn are inclu ded in our line list. In tha t case, the accuracy of the [M/H] estimate aﬀects how well we can compensate for the blend. As described in Sect. 4.4.2, the microturbulence parameter vis necessary when using 1D models of the stellar a tmosphere. Norm ally, vwould be estimated using spectral ﬁtting, but our spectra do not contain enough lines for this. The upcoming Paper VIII in this article series, investigating a sample similar to this, ﬁnds that it was not possible to robustly estimate v. A preliminary discussion of this is found in Nordlander et al. (2017, Sect. 3.4.1). This forced u s to use some empirically determined relation for estimating vfrom the known stellar parameters. Paper VI in this article series used an empirical relation that is commonly used within GaiaESO (Gruyters et al. 2016, Sect. 3.3). The same formula is explicitly described in Gavel et al. (20 19, Appendix E). However, it was calibra te d on population I star s, and is likely not appropriate for our current sample. Instead, for stars with 3.5 > log g we used a relation estimated in Sitnova et al. (2015) based on dwarf stars with −2.6 ≤ [Fe/H] ≤ 0.2: v= −0.21 + 0.06 · [Fe/H] + 5.6T− 0.43 · log g. (3) [km/s]10K Article number, page 4 of 20 Fig. 2: Estimated microturbulence parameter vfor the spectra used in this analysis. The error bars show the range over which each microturbulence was vari ed in the analysis, as described in Sect. 5.1. For stars with log g < 3.5 we used a relation estimated in Mashonkina et al. (2017) for giant stars with −4.0 < [Fe/H] < −1.7: v= 0.14 − 0.08 · [Fe/H] + 4.9T [km/s]10K As discussed in Sect. 5.1, this is expected to be one of the two dominant sources of systematic error, which we took into account by varying the vwithin ±0.3 k m/s around the values predicted by the formula. Figure 2 shows the vfor eac h spectrum used in the ﬁtting, together with the range of variation. There is a discontinuity at the dwarf-giant boundary, but it is small comp ared to the variation in v. The spectra of individual TOP stars generally have to o low S/N to be reliab ly analysed, especially since we have found S/Ndependent systematic errors, which we discuss in Sect. 5. 1. This means that we would prefer to have spectra with app roximately equal S/N. As described in Appendix B , we coadd spectra of stars w ith similar stellar parameters to pro duce group spectra with S/N ≈ 100. The analysis pipeline uses several external pieces of software. The pipeline is built around the spectral synthesis code SME. SME in turn requires a line list and a grid of model atmospheres. We describe SME brieﬂy in section 4 .4.1. For the line list, we use the line list that ha s been compiled for use in the Ga ia -ESO Survey, based on the best literature values available around 2012–2014, when the survey began (Gilmore et al. 2012; Heiter et al. 2021). We use model atmospheres calculated with the Model Atmospheres with a Radiative and Convective Scheme (MARCS) code, under spherical symmetry and with v= 2 km/s for stars with log g ≤ 3.5 dex, and with plane-para llel geometry an d v= 1 km /s for stars with log g > 3.5 dex (Gustafsson et al. 2008). In addition, the pipeline ma kes use o f the IDL Astronom y User’s Library (AstroLib) and the Coyote IDL library (Landsman 1993; Fanning 2015). Outside of the pipeline proper, several Python modules were used: Astropy was used to handle spectral ﬁles (Astropy Collaboration et al. 20 13; Table 1: Lines used to derived stellar abundances. Only Mg4702, Ti4563 and Fe4583 were used for ﬁtting the trend models. All wavelengths are given in Å. The line mask describes the wavelength interval used in the ﬁtting of abundances, and the segment mask describes the entire wavelength region modelled around a line, as described in Sect. 4.4.1. Price-Whelan et al. 2018). SciPy was used to handle most calculations (Jones et al. 2001). emcee was used to run Goodman an d Weare’s Aﬃne Invariant Markov Chain Monte Carlo Ensemble Sampler for model ﬁts (Goodman & Weare 2010; Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). Matplotlib was used to make all plots in this article (Hunter 2007). SME is a code for synthesising and ﬁtting stellar spectra. The earliest published version is descr ibed in Piskunov & Valenti (1996) and the most important changes since then are documented in Piskunov & Valenti (2017). Our pipeline uses SME version 542. SME calculates synthetic spectra on the ﬂy, based on a line list and a grid of model atmospheres. To determine stellar parameters and/or abundances, it ﬁts synthetic spectra to an observed spectrum (Piskunov & Valenti 2017). The ﬁtting method resembles a χ-minimisation, but tweaked to be more robust to the line list being incomplete (Piskunov, priv. comm). When estimating abundances, SME also provides estimates of the uncertainties on the estimates, as described in Sect. 5.3. We determined line-by-line abundances. This means that for each line, we deﬁned a segment mask and a line mask. The segment mask simply speciﬁes which pixels in the observed spectrum should be synthesised at all. The line mask speciﬁes which pixels shou ld be used in the ﬁtting itself. We show the segment and line masks for each line in Table 1. Before the abundance determination, the segment is normalised using a linear rescaling that tries to ﬁt the observed spectrum to an initial model spectrum, which is calculated using the ﬁrst g uess of the abundances. Current versions of SME allow doing this by a weighted least-squares minimisation over all pixels in a segment (Piskunov, priv. comm). Older versions instead require the pixels used in the ﬁtting to be explicitly assigned to a continuum mask, and only use an unweighted least-squares minimisation (Piskunov & Valenti 1996, Sect. 3.4). We use the newer method in the main body of the article, but since – as discussed in Sect. 5.1 – the continuum normalisation is expected to be on e of our two main sources of systematic error, we compare to the results of using the olde r method in Appendix F. In SME, the abundances in stars are by default assumed to follow the Solar abundance pattern as estimated by Grevesse et al. (2007), but rescaled by [M/H ]. In addition, in our pipeline, the abundances of the α elements O, Ne, Mg , Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Ti are incr eased b y 0.4, which is an em pirical estimate of [α/Fe] at this metallicity. By default, SME assumes that the stellar atmosphere is 1D and that radiation transport occurs in local thermodynamic equilibrium (LT E), meaning that atomic level populations can be estimated using Saha-Boltzmann statistics. In some cases we can take into account non-LTE (NLTE) eﬀects, and in some cases we can a t least partly take 3D eﬀects into account. As a r ule, we cannot do both at once. In ou r analysis we used 1 D LTE for Ti and Fe, and 1D NLTE for Mg and Ba. However, in Appe ndix D we consider indicative 3D LT E calculations for Ti and Fe. The 1D approximation is exp e cted to be poor at describing convection near the optical surface since the interaction between convective motion and radiative energy transport c reates both temperature inhomogeneities across the surface – which cannot be described in 1D – and a steeper temperature gradie nt than predicted in 1D. There are also lo cal velocity ﬁelds that give rise to a d esaturation eﬀect, which we mod el in 1D as m ic roturbulence with the parameter v. All these cause the Curves of Growth (COG) fo r saturated lines – such as the Ti II and Fe II lines in red giants – to be much more accurate in 3D than 1D. On the other hand, the overionisation of Mg I at these metallicities means tha t the LTE ap proximatio n is likely to get worse in 3D since the steeper temperature gradient increases the NLTE eﬀects. The LTE assumption is expected to give good results for the Ti II and Fe II lines, but not for the Mg I and Ba II lines. The stars in M30 are very metal-poor, which means that the lack of metal-line opacities causes the loc al gas and radiation ﬁeld to decouple. This results in overionisation, meaning that the neutral ground state is depleted relative to the predictions of LTE. The singly ionised majority species – Ti II and Fe II – are relatively immune to this since they have higher ionisation potentials. For the NLTE co mputation, we used a grid of departure coeﬃcients that estimate how much the level populations at dif ferent depths in the atmosp here are expected to diﬀer between NLTE and LTE. The capacity for using such grids is built into SME (Piskunov & Valenti 2017, Sect. 3). We used two precalculated grids, one for Ba and one for Mg. For M g, we used a grid described in Amarsi et al. (2020), using a model atom described in Osorio et al. (2015). We performed 3D LTE spectrum synthe sis calculations using SCATE (Hayek et al. 2011) on 3D hydrod ynamic model atmospheres from the STAGGER grid (Magic et al. 2013). We sampled the temporal evolution by using 20 snapshots, selected at regular in tervals, from each hydrodynamic simulation. For comparison, 1D LTE radiative transfe r calculations were performed using the same codes on model atmospheres computed with the 1D hydrostatic model atmosphere code ATMO (Magic et al. 2013) wh ic h impleme nts the same microp hysics as STAGGER. The radiative transfer calcu la tions were performed over a range of a bunda nces in steps of 0.1 dex. 3D LTE-1D LTE abun dance corrections were derived by interpolatin g the 3D LTE equiva le nt widths onto the 1D LTE curve of growth. Our goal is to constrain T, assuming the stellar evolution models described in Sect. 3. We also comp a red our results to a null model that assumes that abundances do not vary with stellar parameters at all, to test whether we could rule out the possibility that diﬀu sio n processes have no app reciable eﬀect on abundances. It would seem to be simple to compare these models: We could simply ﬁt the derived abundances to the predictions of all models, and then compare the qua lity of th e best ﬁts using the metric of our choice. Unfor tunately, things are more complicated than they seem: Both the derived abundances and model predictions have systematic un c ertainties of comparable size to the random uncertainties. This means that we cannot simply calculate some goodness-of-ﬁt metric f or each value of Tand choose the best one. We describe the origins of the systematic uncertainties in Sect. 5.1 and our method for constraining them in Sect. 5.2. In Sect. 5.3 we state our method for estimating statistical uncertainties. In Sect. 5.4 we state the likelihood function that follows from the assumptions made. In Sect. 5.5 we describe the null hypothesis that we used to verify that our results look notice ably diﬀerent from what would be expected if diﬀusion processes are ineﬃcient. In stellar spectroscopy, derived parameters such as elemental abundances often have systematic uncertainties of comparable size to statistical uncertainties. In this speciﬁc case, we know that the abundance s derived by our pipeline have systematic errors that depend strongly on Tand log g. In ad dition, the derived abunda nces depend systematically on the S/N, which for observational r easons depend on Tand log g as well. Before we c ould make any well- motivated statement about how well the derived abundanc e s ﬁt any hypoth esis, we needed to compensate for or at least constrain these systematic eﬀ ects. In a ddition, an even bigger source of systematic uncertainty is that some starting abundance for each element must be assumed in the stellar evolution model, before the evolution over time can be calculated. However, unless the assumed value is very far oﬀ from the true value, this simply creates a T-independent constant oﬀset in the (loga rithmic) abunda nces. A general overview o f sources of systematic uncertainty in stellar spectrosco py can be found in Jofré et al. (2019). In this study we assumed that the do minant sources of systematic uncertainty are the continuum placement and the choice of v. As described in Sec. 4.1, it is necessary to estimate the continuum level aroun d a spectral line before the line c a n be used to estimate an elemental abundance. This estimate is never perfect, and rela tively small errors can have a large impact on derived abundances. If this simply led to a random scatter in the derived abundances, it would be easy to deal with, but unfortunately it is likely to depend on the stellar parameters. A de tailed study supporting this assumption can be found in Jofré et al. (2017). As described in Sect. 4.3 the microturbulence parameter vmust be estimated for those abundance estimations that use a onedimensional model of the stellar atmosphere, a nd we have no way of directly measuring it. There are many methods for estimating vbased on T, and any one of them will systemati- Article number, page 6 of 20 cally diﬀer from the true Tdependence, imposing a systematic error in the derived abundances. In principle, there are many other sources of systematic error, due to both observational biases and imperfections in th e modelling. However, we to some extent implicitly take them into account, as long as th ey are much smaller than the two sources of systematic errors that we explicitly take into account. Our method for compensating for the systematic errors only requires some upper bound on their size, while being otherwise agn ostic about what the actual so urce of the error s is. Hence, as long as the additional sources of error are small enough to ﬁt within the bounds set by those two source s of e rror, it can compensate for them. As an example o f an additional source of systematic error, Gruyters et al. (2014, Sect. 3.6 & Fig. 6) – Paper V in this article series – found that this type of study is also aﬀected by systematic errors in abundances derived from weak lines. The underlying reason is that the e rror estimation described in Sect. 5.3 implicitly assumes that the expected ﬂux depends linearly on the parameter being estimated. However, w hile the expected ﬂux is approximately linear in the relative number of absorbers N/N, we deﬁne abundances on a logarithmic scale. For weak lines the pixel noise is proportionally large compared to the change in expected ﬂux given by a change in the estimated abundance, which crea tes a non-negligible asymmetry in the error on the abundance estimate. To constrain the systematic uncertainties, we need to make six assumptions. The ﬁrst assumption is that for a given element, the arbitrariness in the assumed abundances of the p rimordial gas in the stellar evolution models will aﬀect model abundances in all stars with a scaling factor that is constant over the cluster. The second assumption is that the systematic error not due to the initial abundance choice is due to oﬀsets in the continuum level and arbitrariness in the assumed v. The third assumption is tha t by looking at a spectrum, a hum a n spectroscopist can give a reliable estimate of what range the correct continuu m level could plausibly lie within. The fourth assumption is that for a given spectrum, the component of the erro r that is uncorrelated from spectrum to spectrum will be approximate ly the same no matter how the continuum is placed for that particular spectrum. The ﬁfth assumption is that for a sample of stars such as ou rs, v is somewhere within ±0.3 km/s of those predicted by Eqs. (3) and (4), and within this interval the derived abundance depends monotonically on v. The sixth assumption is that the systematic error does not vary very quickly over the range of stellar parameters pr esent in our sample, so that it can be well approximated with a low-order polynomial. Assumption one means that we can add an arbitrary constant to the log-abundances for each element. In practise, we shifted the average abundance of the stars below 5500 K to have the same mean abundance as predicted by the model. Below that threshold the models make practica lly identical predictions. Assumptions two thr ough ﬁve allowed us to use the following meth od for constraining the systematic uncertainty f or each abundance estimate: We visu ally inspected the ﬁtted spectra for each abundance, and noted within which ra nge the con tinuum could reasonably vary. Doing this, we foun d that the continuum must be somewhere within 0.5% of SM E’s b e st estimate. We re-derived abundances with the continua shifted to the top and bottom of that range. We also re-derived abundances with v varied by 0.3 km/s, giving us nine derived abundances in total. The excep tion is in Appendix D, where the 3D- modelling makes the vparameter unnecessary. We denote the highest and lowest estimates of the abundance by aand a, respectively. Assumption six then a llows us to model the systematic error e as a polynomial subject to the constraint that for each spectrum e≤ a− a. Since we do not know how quickly the systematic erro r may vary, we modelled it with a range of polynomials of increasing order. In Sect. 6.1 we describe how we dealt with the problem that a higher-order polynomial necessarily gives a b e tter ﬁt. When ﬁtting the stellar evolution models described in Sect. 3, we assumed that the derived stellar abund ances follow normal distributions centred around th e values predicted by the models, plus the systematic oﬀsets. Sect. 5.3 describes how the width of the distributions was estimated. While the dependence of derived abundances on S/N can in principle be handled in the same way as the dependences directly on the stellar pa rameters, we used a simple method to mostly cancel it out: Instead of deriving abundances for th e spectra of individual stars, we coadded spectra with similar stellar parameters together, in such a way that the grouped spectra have approxim ately the same S/N. Given this, this source of systema tic error should to ﬁrst approximation aﬀect all derived abundances equally, which makes it easier to take into account. We show this coaddition in Appendix B. We had two sources of discrepancies between our derived and predicted abundances tha t have to be treated as statistical errors. First of all, pixel noise in our spectra created some am ount of scatter in our derived abundances. Secondly, there is some intrinsic random scatter in the true abundances in the stars, which is physically real but uninteresting for our attempts at ﬁtting abundance trends. Current versions of SME estimate statistical errors using a heuristic algorithm described in Piskunov & Valenti (2017). That algorithm was derived on the assumption that multiple lines are being ﬁtted, and attempts to take in to account systematic shifts in the abundance scale due to uncertain line parameters. It is probably not a ppropriate for estimating the errors in singleline abundances. To get mean ingful estimates of the statistical errors, we restor ed the older err or estimation method in our copy of SME. This takes the errors directly from th e covariance m atrix generated in the ﬁtting, as described in Piskunov & Valenti (1996). This essentially assum ed th a t our statistical er rors come entirely from pixel noise. We also imposed a lower bound of 0.05 dex o n the errors, since we do not believe any error estimate lower than that is realistic. We assumed that the intrinsic scatter in abundances is normally distributed with a standard deviation σthat is speciﬁc to each element. We also made the simplifying assump tion that within the spectra used to create our group spectra, as described in Sect. B, the variation in abundance is small enoug h to have an approximately linear eﬀect on the abunda nces – meaning that in our spectral ﬁtting the group spectra could be expected to behave√ as though they had abundan ces with variations σ/n, where nis th e number of stars included in each group spectrum. Magnesium sho uld have the greatest scatter, since it is affected by anticorrelations. Paper II in this series found intrinsic scatter with a magnitude somewhere below 0.1 dex in the c luster NGC 6397 (Lind et al. 2008, Sect. 4.2, Fig. 7). Paper V got similar results for the cluster NGC 6752 (Gruyters et al. 2014, Fig. 3). Based on this, we adopted 0.1 as a conservative estimate of σ. Fe and Ti ar e not aﬀected by anticorrelations, but still have some observed scatter (Milone et al. 2017, Sect 3.3). For Fe, an upper lim it of 0.05 dex has been established (Carretta et al. 2009), so we adopted this as a conservative estimate of σ. Since Ti should behave similarly to Fe, we adopted this as our estimate of σas well. We modelled the error by assuming that for each star i the derived abundanc e ais given by where a(T)is the abundance predicted by the model, whether the null model or diﬀusion, ais some number that does no t vary from star to star, ais a normal distribution with mean zero and standa rd deviation σ, eis a polynomial in Tand eis a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation σgiven by SME’s uncertainty estimates as described in Sect. 5.3. The likelihood fo r a particular aand ele ment X is then given Since the aare uncorrelate d (by construction, all cor relations are built into trends and systematics) the likelihood for the full sequence of estimates {a} is given by For each line we calculated best ﬁts to several models of the form (5). We used the T5.8, T5.9, T5.95, T6.0, T6.09, T6.2, and null models to describe the true trend a(T)and a zeroth to ﬁfth degree polynomial in Tto describe the systematic error e, making 7 · 6 = 42 models in total. We did not go beyond that since we expect an e rror model with six free parameters to be able to ﬁt pra ctically any data. We took as our null hypothesis that the abundances follow a normal distribution in dependent of the stellar parameters. As the mean of the distribution, we took the solar abundance scaled by the metallicity and expected [α/M] of the M30 stars. As the stan dard deviation of the distribution we used the same σas for the stellar evolution models. Given the likelihood function (7), each combination of diﬀusion trend and degree of the systematic error polynomial has some maximum likelihoo dˆL. We want to turn those likelihoods into some qua ntitative statements about how likely the diﬀerent values of Tare, and also how well our data could be disting uished from what we would see under the n ull hypothesis that diﬀusion is ineﬃcient. We compare all m odels using the corrected Akaike infor mation criterion (AIC), described in Sect. 6.1. We also compare the best-ﬁt stellar evolution model to the null hypothesis by using the likelihood ratio, described in Sect. 6.2. We make a caveat a bout the ‘garden of forking paths’ issue with the statistical hypothesis testing in Sect. 6.3. AIC= 2k +2k(k + 1)n − k − 1− 2 lnˆ where n is the number of data points, k is the number of free parameters in the mo del andˆL is the maximu m likelihood of the data – that is, the likelihood given the best-ﬁtting mode l parameters, which in our case are Tand the coeﬃcients of the polynomial describ ing the systematic error. (Some authors choose to drop the factors of 2 from the deﬁnition) . In a set of models, ∆AICfor a model is the diﬀerence b etween the AICfor that model and that of the model with the lowest AI C. When presenting re sults, we will only show ∆AIC. A detailed discussion of the deﬁnition and interpretation of the AICcan be found in Burnham & Anderson (2003) or Burnh a m & Anderson (2004). However, we attempt to give a n intuitive explanation here: None of the statistical models that we were testing is exactly true, but we wanted to identify which one is closest to the truth. One measure of how ‘close to the truth’ a statistical distribution is, is the Kullback-Le ibler divergence (KL divergence ) between that distribution and the true distribution. Since we do not know the true distribution, we cannot calculate this directly. However, by looking at the diﬀerence ∆AIC between two m odels, we can estimate the pr obability that one model has a lower KL divergence from the truth than the other. Translating ∆AICinto these p robabilities is not completely straightforward. As a heuristic, if two models diﬀer by ∆AIC< 2, they have comparable probabilities of being the KLminimising model, and if they diﬀer by ∆AIC> 10, th e one with lower AICis virtually certain to be KL-minimising. This can be made more rigorous by in troducing Ak aike weights, deﬁned as where the summation is performed over all ∆AIC. The se weights can be seen as Bayesian posteriors for mod el i being KL-minimising. One advantage of this method is that it neither requires nor prevents us from adopting a Bayesian framework. Contrary to common misconception, the AIC and its corrections can be derived o n either frequentist or Bay esian gro unds. In addition, since it looks at which statistical model is likely to be closest to the true distribution this method does not assume that either model is true. The disadvantage is that we are measuring ‘closeness’ in terms of information loss. While this would be the correct choice if we were only interested in estimating out-ofsample uncertainty – that is, if we on ly wanted to decide which model to use when predicting abundances in the stars of M3 0 that we have not ye t looked at – it is not clear that it is the best measure of which of the under lying physical hyp otheses is likely to be true. Article number, page 8 of 20 Using the likelihood s (7) for each of the 30 model ﬁts we calculated AICfor each m odel. Since the AICis additive – as can be seen from (8) – we looked at the best ﬁt over a ll lines, but we also looked at the AICfor the individual lines separately. We could in princ iple look at combinations of the e rror models, such as a linear error in Ti but quadratic in Fe, but we do not do so and instead assume that if the error in one line must be described with a polynomial of a certain degree , it must be for all lines. Aside from the use of the Akaike information criterion to identify the support f or diﬀerent models, we also looked at the likelihood ratios between the diﬀusion and null models. This to allow us to de monstrate that diﬀusion processes do have eﬀects that can be distinguished from systematic err ors, irrespective of how well Tcan be constrained. When comparin g the null and stellar evolution models, we took the likelihoo ds for the stellar evolution models identiﬁed a s the best, in the sense of h aving the lowest AIC. Since the likelihood is monotonously increasing with the number of parameters describing the systematic erro r, there is no u nique highest-likelihood model. The mathematical backgro und for this section can be found in Colquhoun (2019). The likelihood ra tio is formally deﬁned as Using this, we could calculate the False Positive Rate (FPR). This is a Bayesian q uantity, statin g the estimated risk of falsely accepting the a lternative h ypothesis, g iven some prior probability that it is true. This is a useful metric since it essentially correspond s to what readers o ften incorrectly take the p-value to mean, implying that it expresses what most readers looking at pvalues actually want to know. (A detailed discussion of common misconceptions of p-values can b e found in Good man (2008)). Formally, the FPR is d eﬁned as FPR ≡1 1 + L where P(H)is the prior probability tha t the diﬀusion hypothesis is true. If we accept a prior of 0.5 for both the null hypothesis and the diﬀu sion hypothesis, this simpliﬁes to Alternatively, we can ac cept a FPR= 0.05, and calculate the smallest pr ior P(H)that one could have that would still allow us to accept the h ypothesis: One advantage of using the likelihood ratio is that it gives us quantitative results that have fairly straightforward interpretations. One disadvantage is that we have to select either P(H)or FPR m ore or less a rbitrarily. A second d isadvantage is that it implicitly assumes that one o r the other of our models is true: In reality, while one or the other is true of the physical hypotheses that diﬀu sio n does or does not appreciably aﬀect stellar spectra, the model hypotheses that the stellar abundances are sample d from statistical distributions of the form (5) are certainly all false. Whatever distribution reality is sampling from, it is g uaranteed to be more com plex than our models. We should point out that neither the values of ∆AICor FPR can be taken entirely at face value. Strictly speaking, statistical measures of this kind can only be interpreted in a straightforward way when the pro c edure for statistical analysis was decided on before the data were seen. When the analysis was adapted in response to the data, the study has to be seen as exploratory rather than conﬁrmatory, and statistical measures have to be tre ated as heuristics. T his issue is discussed in Gelman & Loken (2014) regarding p-values speciﬁca lly, but the argument is general enough to apply to any statistical measur e. In our case, several important discoveries were made partway through the statistical analysis. These include, but wer e not limited to, ﬁnding that there are non-negligible parameterdependent systematic uncertainties, that spectra of individual stars tend to have too low S/N to be usef ul, that systematics also depend on S/N and v, and that there a re two very diﬀerent but arguably reasonable methods for calculating SM E uncertainties. Hence, we have to consider this an explo ratory study. We estimate abundances for our sample of group spectra of stars from the TOP to the tip of the red giant branch (RGB) of M30, as described in Sec t. 4. We use those abundances to ﬁt statistical models that contain both the predictions of stellar evolution models and a model of parameter-dependent systematic errors, as described in Sec t. 5. We then compa re the models using the Akaike information criterion as a way of ﬁxing the parameter T that describes the eﬃciency of AddMix p rocesses in the stellar evolution models, as described in Sect. 6.1. We also use AIC and likelihood ratios to compare the models to the null hypothesis that the re are no overall trends – the likelihood ratios being described in Sect. 6.2. We discuss the results of using all lines together in Sect. 7.1 We discuss the results f or Mg, Ti and Fe individually in Sects. 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4. We make some concluding rema rks in Sect. 8. We show all derived abundances in Table B.1, tog ether with other properties of each spectrum. In Ta ble 2 we show the combined ∆AICfor all lines, assuming that the true trend is either that predicted by one o f our stellar evolution mo dels, or simply ﬂat, and that the systematic error is somewhere between constant and a 5th degree polynomial. Just by going with the heuristic that models whose ∆AICvalues diﬀer by less than 2 are more or less indistinguishable, while models th at have ∆AIClarger than 10 can probably be ruled out, we can draw the conclusion that the models closest to reality are almost certainly T6. 09 and T6.2, and the null mo del can be ruled out. Our systematic errors are probably best modelled as either constant or a linear oﬀset in T, although the second- and third-order polynomials are still plausib le . No matter how we mo del our systematic errors, T5.8, T5.9, T5.95, and T6.0 are deﬁnitely r uled out. We show the Akaike weights – as deﬁned in (9) – for the models in Table 3. Within a Bayesian framework, the weights can be interprete d as posterior probabilities of each model being KL-m inimising, but even within a Bayesian framework the caveat in Sec t. 6.3 still applies. The weights say e ssentially the same as the rule-of-thumb interpretations above. The probability Table 2: ∆AICvalues for all four lines of Fe, Ti, and Mg together. Each column assumes a particular stellar evolution model, as described in Sect. 3, and each row assumes a particular model of the error, as described in Sect. 5.2. Values above 10 are written in grey, since they represent models that can essentially be ruled out. const. 180 64.8 35.6 16.9 2.59 0.00 58.0 Table 3: Akaike weight w, as deﬁned by Eq. (9), for all lines combined. Weights below 0.01 are written in grey, since they represent models that, under the Bayesian interpretation of Akaike weights, have a probability below 1% of being KL-minimising. const. 0.00 0.00 0 .00 0.00 0 .12 0.44 0.00 is negligible that any model o ther than T6.09 or T6.2 is KLminimising. We show the log-likelihoods of the linear-oﬀset models in Table 4. With these, we can compare the best-ﬁttin g null mod el (with linear systematic error) to the best-ﬁtting stellar evolution model (T 6.2 with constant systematic error) outside of the AICframework. According to (12) rejecting the null hyp othesis based on this would give us a FPR of 2.56 · 10. Conversely, (13) states that we should b e willing to pro ceed on the assumption that diﬀusion p rocesses are real as long as our prior was above 4.88 · 10. In summary, irrespective of what framework we use, we can conclud e that log(T/ [K])is probably somewhere around 6.096.2. We also ﬁnd that in light of the data, we can rule out the null hypothesis that the abund ance trends are purely an eﬀect of systematics. The AddMix eﬃciency T6.09-6.2 derived here is somewhat higher th an that found by Papers I-III in this article series when they investigated the cluster NGC 6397, which is a factor of two more metal-rich than M30 (Korn et al. 2007; Lind et al. 2008; Nordland er et al. 2012). Our ﬁndings mostly support the conclusions of Paper VI. That article attempted to investigate the Spite platea u by estimating abundances for lithium and several elem ents in stars in M30. They used T6.0 in their analysis, based on Paper III, but tentatively noted that T5.8 actually gave a better ﬁt to their derived calcium abundances. Based purely on our ﬁndings, T6.0 was the best choice of the two, but either T6.09 or T6.2 could have been better. In Table 5 we show ∆AICfor the ﬁts to the Mg4702-line . The line clearly favours the null model. However, if it has to choose between one of the other mo dels, it p refers T6. 2, without showing any strong pr eference for any model of the systematic error. In Fig. 3 we show the abundances as functions of T, together Table 4: Maximum (best-ﬁt) log-likelihoods lnˆL for all l ines combined. Fig. 3: Model predictions and estimated abundances for the Mg4702 line. The red curve shows the abundance predictions from T5.8, the green those from T5.9, the light blue those from T5.95, the dark blue those from T6.0, the violet those from T6.09 and the magenta those from T6.2. Red dots denote estimated abundances for each group spectrum. The black error bars show the random component of the error. The dashed black curve shows our estimate of the true trend with the best-estimate of the systematic error added. Table 5: ∆AICvalues for Mg4702 line, assuming 1D-NLTE. Values above 10 are written in grey, since they represent models that can essentially be ruled out. const. 121 56.3 37.2 22.1 6.84 0.00 6.00 with the model predictions and the bounds on the systematic errors. There is an ap parent rise in the abundances near the TOP. This coincides with an increase in the width of the sy stematic uncertainty. We show the observed and modelled ﬂux for the Mg line for each group spectrum in Fig. 4. This shows the likely reason why: The line becomes much shallower near the TOP, which leads to a systematic error separate from the continuum ﬁtting or v, as describ ed in Sect. 5.1. In summary, it seems that this line on its own cannot rule out the null model, but if some external constraint does, it gives most of the information that constrains T. This is a bit surprising, given that it is the element that is expected to have the largest intrinsic scatter due to anticorrelations. As we will see in Sect. 8, Article number, page 10 of 20 Fig. 4: Magnesium line for each group spectrum. Black pluses denote observed ﬂuxes with error bars. Blue curves denote best ﬁts given by SME assuming the v-values given by Eqns. (3) and (4). The vertical scale is arbitrary. On the right side are shown approximate T-values of the group spectra. the reason is mostly that it has a more distinct predicted trend than the o ther lines, and that it is less sensitive to v. In Fig. 5 we show the abundances as functions of T, together with the model predictions and the bounds on the sy stematic errors. The group spectrum w ith T= 5 878 K, which covers the log g range 3.666-3.726 dex, lo oks like a n outlier since it has the derived abundance range 2.42-2.62 dex while the abundances for the surrounding spectra lie above 2.7 dex. Based on visual inspection, we believe that this is due to a discontinuity in the observed ﬂuxes at wavelengths close to the Ti4563 line in that spectrum, placing it among those most aﬀected by the systematic error introduced by the continuum ﬁtting (see Sect. 5.1). The same can be said about the hottest spectrum , at T= 6429 K, which covers the log g range 4.066-4.21 dex. In Table 6 we show the ∆AICvalues for the Ti4563 line. As one might expect from the ﬁgure, ∆AICis compatible with any stellar evolution model except T5.8. However, it can deﬁnitely rule out the null model, which the Mg4702 on its own could not do. Table 6: ∆AICvalues for Ti4563 line. Values above 10 are wri tten in gray, since they represent models that can essentially be ruled out. const. 38.2 11.2 4.28 1.51 0.91 2 .64 32.5 Fig. 5: Predictions and estimated abundances for the Ti4563 line. Symbols are the same as in F ig. 3. Table 7: ∆AICvalues for Fe4583 line. Values above 10 are written in grey, since they represent models that can essentially be ruled out. const. 26.6 3.99 0.77 0.00 1.55 4 .07 26.2 In Fig. 6 we show the abun dances as a function of T, togethe r with the model predictions and the bounds on the systematic errors. In Table 7 we show ∆AICfor the ﬁts. The line turns out to be compatible with every model, includin g just barely T5.8 and the null model. This seems to be due to a combination of large statistical errors in the derived abundances, and all models except T5.8 and the null model making very similar predictions. We have derived stellar abundances of Mg, Ti, and Fe for a sample of stars from the metal-poor cluster M30 using a spectral ﬁtting method. We have used the der ived abunda nces to ﬁt combinations of stellar evolution models and models of our systematic errors. The stellar evolution models predict various degrees of surface depletion of elements due to ato mic diﬀusion, leading to a temperature dependence of the abundances in the visible stellar atmosphere. The models diﬀer in the a ssumed eﬃ ciency of the AddMix, which is parametrised by a reference temperature Fig. 6: Predictions and estimated abundances for the Fe4583 line. Symbols are the same as in F ig. 3. T. The models of o ur systematic errors assume that our derived abundances are oﬀset by a low-order polynom ia l in the eﬀective temperature, and that this oﬀset comes mostly from errors in the continuum placement and assumed microturbulence. We have then compared the combined ﬁts using the Akaike information criterion a nd ﬁnd that the model combinations la belled as most likely to be closest to reality are all in a small range of T. The process of developing our statistical method allows us to state some general conclusions about this type of stud y. There are three properties that a sp ectral line should have to be useful in constraining T(or some other parameter that stellar evolution models are sensitive to). First of all, the predicted trend should be as sensitive to Tas possible – that is, ∂a(T)/∂T should be as large as possible. Secondly, this sensitivity sho uld change as quickly with the temperature as possible – that is, ∂a(T)/∂T∂Tshould have a large value somewhere, although it does not particularly matter where. This is necessary to allow distinguishing the measured tr e nd from a systematic error: If the stellar evolution models predict that changing Tsimply raises the trend uniformly, it is very diﬃcult to distinguish that from a systematic error. On the other hand, if the models pred ic t trends that sharply diverge at some speciﬁc tempe rature, and it turns out that the measured abundances do change at that speciﬁc temperature by the amount predicted by some value of T, then it is very unlikely that this is be cause the systematic errors so happen to change sharply at that speciﬁc temperatu re. Thirdly, the measured abunda nces should h ave as little sensitivity to v – and other diﬃcult-to-constrain parameters – as possible. Fig . 7 shows the diﬀerences ∆≡ log ε(X)− lo g ε(X), where Xis the abundance of element X assuming Ad dMix model T x.y. Trends are shown for each element that we have models for. In m ost cases, the elements that have the greatest ∆are also those for which the derivative of ∆ with respect to Ttakes the greatest value at some point, such as Li, N a , Mg, Ne, and Al. Based on th is, we recommend that studies of this sort focus on light elements. In particular, the Na 8183 − 94 Å doublet and the Al 13123 − 13 150 Å lines are measurable in ﬁrst-generation TOP stars at this metallicity, while still n ot becoming strongly saturated on the RGB. These elements have the additional advantage that they have well-known atom data, and their electron structure is simple eno ugh to make 3D NLTE calculations feasible. Fig. 7: Sensitivity of the predicted surface abundances t o the choice of T, given here as ∆for each element that we have models for. We ﬁnd that we can rule out the null hypothesis of no abundance variation, and that our stellar evolution model with atomic diﬀusion and additional mixing with an intermediate strength of log(T/ [K])= 6.09-6.2 is most co nsistent with the derived abundances. This allows us to slightly amend one important re sult of Paper VI : The authors found an average lithium abundance on the Spite-plateau of 2.21 ± 0.12 dex, correspon ding to an initial abundance of A(Li)= 2.48 ±0. 10 dex, which is considerably below the value of 2.72 dex predicted by current models of Big Bang nucleosynthesis (Pitrou et al. 2018). However, they did so provisiona lly, based on a T6.0 model. For the T6.096.2 m odels, it would correspond to an initial abundance of 2.42 2.46 dex. Surprisingly, the gap to the BBN lithium abundance is larger than the ones found in other globular clusters studied in this series of papers. Even though a stellar solution to the co smological lithium problem remains possible and even likely (see Melén dez et al. (2010) and Gao et al. (2020) for independent piec es of evidence), the phy sics of stellar internal mixing is too po orly und e rstood to achieve a fully satisfactory agreement with precisioncosmolog y BBN predictions at presen t. The physical eﬀects that give rise to additional mixing below the ou te r convection zone in Population II stars need to be modelled in the framework of hydrodynamics.