Abstract—Self-organizing networks (SONs) need to be endowed with self-coordination capabilities to manage the complex relations between t heir internal components and t o avoid their destructive interactions. Existing communication technologies commonly implement responsive self-coordination mechanisms that can be very slow in run-time situations. The sixth generation ( 6G) networks, being in their early stages of research and standardization activities, open new opportunities to opt for a design-driven approach when developing self-coordination capabilities. This can be achieved through th e use of hybrid weakly coupled SON designs. In this article, we review the history of SONs including the inherent self-coordination feature. We then delve int o the concept of hybrid SONs (H-S ONs), and we summarize the challenges, opportunities, and fut ure trends for H-SON development. We provide a comprehensive collection of standardization activities and recommendations, discussing the key contributions and potential work to continue the evolution and push for a wide adoption of the H-SON paradigm. More importantly, w e propose that H-SONs must be weakly coupled networks, i.e., th e various feedback loops must be almost isolated from each other to i mprove the stabili ty and to avoid chaotic situations. We ﬁnally conclude the pap er with the key hints about the future landscape and the key drivers of 6G H-SONs. Index Terms—6G; self- organization; self-coordination; conﬂict avoidance and resolution; weakly coupled system; hybrid selforganizing network (H-SON). The road to 6G networks has recently begun. It continues with the evolution of the capabilities of the network, with so me emphasis on the convergence of ﬁxed and wireless networks. A key problem is being able to manag e and control networks, which are increasing in complexity and heterogeneity, and at the same time redu cing the need for manual control. This problem is not totally new since it was already targeted during the development of 5G and its predecessors. Over the years, the standards that en a ble the design of functions for implementing self-* features, such as self-organization, self-conﬁguratio n, self-diagnosis, self-repair, self-healing, self-optimization, selfawareness, self-adaptation, and other automated operations such as auto-discovery, have matured under the umbrella of self-manag ed systems and networks. Within them we ﬁnd the inception of the well-known self-organizing networks (SONs), which brings all self-* featu res to the network. Self-organizatio n [1], [2] is a general term that covers any kind of autonomous restructuring of a system a nd is, therefo re, the highest and most general in the hierarchy of all techn ic a l systems. T hus, the main objective of SONs in communication systems is to reduce capital expenditures (CAPEX) and operational expenditures (OPEX) through automating as many features as possible, spanning multiple network components and various engineering phases. SONs will therefore continue to empower future communicatio n systems that must offer certain fundamental properties, i.e., fu nctionality, stability, scalability, performance, dependability, security, cost-effectiveness, and resilience [3]. For instance, features such as densiﬁcation or support of mu ltiple radio access techn ology call for smoothly scalable SONs [4]. On the o ther hand, the SON architecture is decomp osed in to a set of smaller functional units refer red to as SON functions (SONFs). Since 5G and beyond networks are characterized by high system dynamics, SONFs will be increasingly tr iggered and, consequently, they may interact either constructively or destructively. Thereby, advanced self coordination cap abilities are needed to ensure a conﬂict-free operation. Sur prisingly, this feature has attracted very little research and standardization efforts. Most self-coordin ation principles are usually lig htly covered [5], left open for future research a ttention [4] or not considered at the design phase of new communication systems [6]. To the best of our knowledge, the paper Bayazeed et al. [6] is the ﬁrst attempt to pr ovide a detailed survey about the self-coordination functionality in cellular ne tworks. It starts by providing an historical overview of SONs after the 2000s, i.e., starting from 3 G networks. Then, it introdu c es a highlevel comprehensive framework to categorize self-coo rdination logics into pro te c tive, rea ctive, and proactive. Accord ing to [6], protective methods that anticipate conﬂicts since the de sig n stage are only valid for static situations wher e as system dynamics c a ll for proactive methods that c a n predict th e potential conﬂicts at the execution time using artiﬁcial intelligen ce (AI) and machine learning (ML). The present paper complements the work of Fourati et al. [2] and Baya zeed et al. [6] by providing a comprehensive overview of the self-organization history from the late 1940s. We then emphasize the importance o f hierarchy with different time scales, decoupling of different hierarchy levels (i.e ., time scale separation) or between subsystems at the same hierar c hy level (i.e., separation using orthogonality), multiple d egre es of centralization , and negotiation between various system pa rts as promising design paradigms to build the components of SONs and achieve a conﬂict-free behavior by design as opposed to reactive and proactive methods that can be too slow in dynamic situations. We particularly delve into the deﬁnition of the concept of w eakly or loosely coupled systems refe rred to as Hybrid SONs (H-SONs) in [2] and [6], which are gaining importance within the current network landscape. From a standardization perspective, there has been insufﬁcient interest in self-coordination aspe c ts and the f ocus has been on the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), the International Telecommunications Union-Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), and the Eu ropean Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) activities [5], thus overlooking many initiatives driven by othe r standard iz ation development organizations (SDOs). Based on the above introduction, the contributions of this article are three-fold. First, we concentrate on the potential and the promises of H-SONs for an improved design-driven self-coordination. Second, we provide an in-depth landscape analysis of past and curr ent standardization activities re lated to SONs and the inherent self-coordination f unctionality within various SDOs to explore the harmonization possibilities. Broader standardization-related insights are presented in [7]. Finally, we summarize the challenges an d the futur e technological trends for the development of SONs over the next deca de. The remainder of th is paper is organized as follows. In Section II , we present the background and state-of-the art of SONs. Then, Section III discusses the op portunities, use cases, technical hurdles, and standa rdization landscape of SONs. The challenges, trends as well as dire ctions of research and standardization activities regard ing SONs are identiﬁed in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. The historical development of SONs is presented in Fig. 1. To obtain intelligent behavior, usually a feedback loop is needed. Systems ba sed on the feedback concept can be divided hierarchically into automatic, au tonomous, and self-organizin g systems, from bottom up [8]. A system may have regular inputs and control inputs. Regular inputs include a ny sensing informa tion received fr om the environment, and control inputs are information given by an external controller to perfo rm needed actions. Automatic system s are systems that do not need manua l intervention. They can be divided into control and adaptive systems. They need a control input in the form of a set-point value or refer ence signal, respectively. Autonomous systems are automatic systems that do not need any control input during oper a tion. Autonomous systems are learning systems, which are able to change their behavior based on earlier exp e rience that is saved into a m emory. Self-organiz ing systems are autonomous system s that are able to restructure themselves. The general term self-organization was proposed by Ashby already in 1947. In communicatio ns, the ﬁrst SON was the Internet that was originally called the Arpanet and is based on packet switching. The Transmission Co ntrol Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) fo rmed the present TCP/IP model, and the name of the Arpanet was changed to the Internet. At the same time, the generalized Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model was developed. Ad ho c or unstructur ed networks are multi-hop SONs without a ny ﬁxed infrastructure. Th e history of a d hoc networks started from packet radio networks a lthough the term ”ad hoc networks” was only later ofﬁcially adopted by an IEEE 802.11 subcomm ittee after which the term became popular. The interest in SONs r ose in the 1980s and w e re originally deﬁned to be distributed, thus having no centralized control. The 3GPP Rel. 8 (2008) d ivided SONs into three g roups, inc luding Centralized SON (C-SON), Distributed SON (D-SON), and H-SON, which is a combination of C-SON and D-SON. 3GPP Rel. 11 (2011) proposed the term self-coordinatio n to avoid and resolve conﬂicts in SONs [6]. The research on coordination of conﬂicts in hierarchical systems started in the 1 960s with Mesarovic’s pioneering work. In hierarchical systems, the con ﬂicts were classiﬁed into inter- and intra-level conﬂicts which correspond to vertical and horizontal coupling. One of the me thods suggested was interaction decoupling. Indepe ndently of SONs, distributed computing was developed in computer science towards autonom ic computing that is based on self-mana gement. The term was later ad opted also in communication networks. ETSI deﬁned the Generic Autonomic Networking Architecture (GANA) reference model as the ETSI Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) [9]. GANA describes the concept of “ownership” of managed entities (MEs) (i.e., system resources) that relay their conﬁgura tion to speciﬁc functional entities called decision elements (DEs). They have a one-to-one re la tion to avoid that multiple DEs manip ulate a DE at the same time, requiring DEs to n ego tiate with the DE that “owns” the ME. Among others, GANA deﬁnes multiple runtime techniques to synchronize policies among DEs, handling intents, and self-assessment of objective accomplishment. The most important principles in system design include feedback, optimizatio n and decision making, hierarchy, and degree of centralization [8]. Feed back is based on the sensedecide-act loop, which in mode rn AI forms the basis of an intelligent and rational agent, fo r example an SONF. The ide a led to multi-agent systems (MASs), which form a hierarch y of interacting agents, a good basis for self-organization. Even before the AI th eory was developed, the research on neural networks, pattern recognition, and game theory was started a nd ﬁnally merged to the MAS theory. Thus they wer e precursors of current AI . Optimization and decision m a king is a br oad area with many different approaches. There are usually many conﬂicting objectives measuring the efﬁciency of the use of basic resources such as energy, time, and bandwidth. Optimization p roblems can be convex or non convex in nature. Different types of optima can exist for multiobjective optimization problems such as a globa l or a local optimum. A typical type of optimum that is targeted in such p roblems is called th e Pareto optimum, valid for commensu rate objectives, but it is not in general unique and ther efore a ﬁnal selection must be ma de based on subjective gro unds, usually on fairness. Modern joint or multiobjective optimization started already in the 1950s. Now multiobjective optimization is an essential part of the MAS theory. In practice the basic r esources a re incommensurate. In this case one can use evolutionar y methods, and the result depends on the availability of the reso urces and the ir nee d accordin g to the law of supply and demand. In this way the relative costs of the resources are deﬁned when there is no objective basis for the deﬁnition of the costs. The idea of hierarchy is to decompose a complex pro blem into a hierarchical set of simple r problems if there are different time scales in the changes in the system. This is also the basis for the TCP/IP and OSI models. The hierarchy a lso supports the stability of the system. Modern research on hie rarchy and modularity started in the 1960s with the work by Simon and Mesarovic. It was noticed that biolo gical sy stems are hierarchical and different subsystems or modules at the same hierarchy level are only weakly coupled. The hierarchies were classiﬁed into nested, multilayer, and dominanc e hierarchies. The layer and dominance hierarchie s a re common in co mmunication networks. In a hierarchy, the basic idea is to use low speed, broad range, an d low resolution at th e higher levels such as in the network layer and high speed, narrow rang e, and high resolution at the lower levels such as in the physical layer. The speed should correspond to the rate of ch ange of the relevant network para meters at each level. There is usually orders of magnitude difference in the speed at different levels. Rang e and resolution are deﬁned in the amplitude, time, frequ e ncy, and space domains. In a hierarchical system, a form of joint optimization is cross-layer optimization, which can be loosely or tightly coupled. In the latter case the performance may be better, but the c omplexity is larger, a nd there may be stability problems. According to the conventional degrees of centralization, systems are classiﬁed as centralized, dec e ntralized, and distributed. Centralized systems are based on forced cooperatio n of agents in a hierarchy, decentra lize d systems are based on competition of autonomous agen ts without any hierarc hy, and distributed systems are an intermediate form where the agents cooper a te at least with their closest neighbors by exchanging informa tion. An alternative intermediate form is a hyb rid form that combines centralized and d istributed co ntrol, as in the H-SON. A schematic view of th is architecture is provided in Fig. 2, showing essentially a hierarchical weakly contr olled set of almost autonomou s agents. There is o nly a weak vertical and horizontal coupling or interaction between agents to improve stability so that the feedback loops are wea kly coupled or almost isolated from e ach other. Using different d egre es of coupling, the hybrid form can implement all othe r degrees of centralization as special cases. Self -organizing systems should have at least a weak centralized control to imp rove optimality, fairness, and stability so that the global behavior is predictable. Accordingly, the h igher in the hierarchy we a re, the more intelligence and complexity we have. III. OPPORTUNITIES, USE CASES, TECHNICAL HURDLES, In this section we discuss some opportunities that may bring new possibilities, emerging use cases along with some biggest impediments identiﬁed in SONs, as well as the standardization issues and initiatives derived from them. Rethinking system design is needed to resolve the currently weak coordination among SONFs. This will leverage the b e neﬁts of distributed systems and a pervasive approach through using advanced multi-tenant resource sharing. By coordinating SONFs, different performance metrics will be optimized, especially in dyn amic situations. In addition, some SONFs mostly focus on short term optimization as they mainly operate at the lower layers. With the aid of pervasive intelligence, SONFs will be a ble to process both external historical information gathered from previous experiences and internal contextual da ta to build solid lon gterm optimization and prediction, and thus will truly operate the network in a proactive and autonomous fashion. On the oth e r hand, a key opportunity is to work on the combined hierarchy and degrees of centralization to improve self-coordination. Hierarchy is used in SONs to manage the inherent com plexity whereas different degrees of centralizatio n maintain SONs scalability. A h ybrid form of hierarc hy, i.e., H-SON (Fig. 2) is envisioned to avoid the weaknesses of pure centra lize d a nd distributed paradigms. Such hierarc hical networks can be cre a te d statically in a structured manner or dynamically in an unstructured manner when needed. Stru c tured network partitions can provide better support for AI/ML within a nd ac ross network partitions. The intrinsic priorities of hierarchical sy stems are a very powerful mechanism to resolve conﬂicts in SONs. Sensing information propagates upwards and control information downwards in the hierarchy so tha t higher levels will dete ct the conﬂict and act by preempting the lower levels where decisions are usually made because they are faster. This hierarchy will prevent a conﬂict from lasting for a long time causing system performance degradation. However, hierarchical systems may need a de la y to detect, analyze , and trigger the best countermeasure commensurate with the number of the hierarchy levels. The open radio access network (O-RAN) architecture has been deliberately designed with ﬂexibility to deploy SON functions at the core, metro or edge depending on the control loop latency requirements, using the non real-time (N on-RT) RAN Interface Controller (RIC), near real-time (Near-RT) RIC and potential use of edge platforms hosting virtual network functions (VN Fs) as hosts for AI/ML applica tions as well (Fig. 3). Development of third-party SON software rea lized as rApps and xApps will be made easier by th e d e ﬁnition of reference designs for the supporting platforms’ hardware (e.g ., com mercial off-the-shelf (COTS) equipment) and software and through the deﬁnition of interface standards for the sensing input and action output of SONFs at different levels (e.g., O1 and E2 interfaces). O-RAN design envisions the use of the H-SON concept where there is in te raction between SONFs at different positions in the network. Th e deﬁnition of the A1 interface, in particular, allows a higher-level SON in the Non-RT RIC to access information from the Near-RT RIC and to exert policy controls over the Near-RT RIC. Support of integrated SONFs has been adopted as one of the use cases of interest within O-RAN. The key high -level O-RAN functions are depicted in Fig. 3 allowing for a multitude of more specialized use cases ranging from RAN shar ing to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) radio resource allocation using a weakly coupled design. Optimization and decision making in SONs are facing several hurdles. The reason is that the complexity of o ptimization problems depends exponentially on the size of the system to be optimized. Th erefore in practice, an exhaustive search cannot be used and various heuristic methods have been developed. In general, optimization methods can be divided into top -down deductive methods using parametric models and bottom-up inductive methods based on pattern recognition. The method based on parametric models is usually simple and it converges fast since only the parameters of the mode l must b e id entiﬁed, but it may fail if there is high unc e rtainty about what kind of models should be used. In p attern recognition, also ca lled structural iden tiﬁcation, the model is formed from scratch , for examp le using neur a l networks or evolutionary methods (e.g., gene tic algorithms and game theoretical principles). Such methods are in general complex and they converge slowly, but they ma y work even in uncertain environments if the chang es are not too fast. A combination of the two approaches is known as hybrid intelligent systems. On the oth er hand, an additional technical imped iment is to ﬁnd mechanisms that are optimized to enforce changes required by adapting SONs as soon as they can b e enfor c ed, considerin g the next steps in optimization to avoid unneeded changes but d o no t wait until all changes are deﬁnite. We must balance the cost of a suboptimal n etwork and the cost of making the required change s to optimize it. I ncremental improvements towards the objective need to be made. This is still an open research topic. SONs are a key target of SDOs [5], [10]. T hey are included in the key framework of the ITU-T (Rec. ITU-T Y.3324) as a target for Long Term Evolution (LTE) and beyond, thus SON becomes a source of standardization efforts for 4G successors. Some features of SONs h ave been envisioned for the overall standardization landscape for network management. For in stance, as argued in [ 11], a solution for a network to self-adapt to changes in its environ ment is aligned with ETSI Network Function Virtualization (NFV) Management & Orchestration (MANO) and assumed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) as part of the Network Management Research Group (NMRG) and the A nima WG. In this sense, standardizing selforganization and intelligent reasoning procedures becomes a key for the correct evolution of the network. It is agr eed tha t all c ompone nts, har dware a nd sof tware must be a ssessed, both in terms of their SON capabilities (i.e., auto-*, self-*), as well as their overall adequacy and quality, thus the tenant of the network can have a high degree of certainty that the network will work as desired and expected. In addition, the evolution within E TSI for designing SONs is taking part as Zero Touch Network and Service Management (ZSM), Exp e riential Network Intelligence (ENI) [5], and GANA [9]. They provide underlying mechanisms to build SONs. However, there are many topics to work on, as deﬁned by ETSI in TS 128 313, in order to standardize the mechanisms needed to build a SON, either distributed or centralized. More speciﬁcally, they tend to cover optimization issues and conﬁguration management. However, there are open questions regarding the cross interac tion among ETSI, ITUT, and IETF views, such as the interface co mpatibility and adaptation , the function deﬁnition for consistency, and the consolidatio n of architectu re comp onents fo r allowing multivendor d eployments. These are required in the near future to deﬁne a stab le framework for SONs [7]. SDOs are leveraging the power of digital twins to implement the capa bilities required by SONs. They heavily rely on telemetry. Thus, the procedures, tools, and protocols for telemetry collection, transmission, and pro cessing are being worked on for standardization by SDOs. For instance, the IETF has begu n th e initial steps for this task by the adoption of the Network Telemetry Framework (NTF) as the foundation of a future set of stan dards for this purpose. In addition, standardizing the mechanisms required for leveraging the informa tion provid ed by a digital twin of a SON is an open issue for SDOs. A key is to extend the current a bilities of SONs by eliminating some eleme nts or actors from distributed coordination in response to models obtained by “simulating” possible scenarios, as the main purpose of digital twins. Table I summarizes current and future SDO activities [7]. Obviously, most of those on going standardization initiatives are eith er inspired by or converge toward the reference GANA model, while the latter adheres to the H-SON paradigm guidelines. In this section, we enumerate the fundamental challeng es to be addressed for providing conﬂict-f ree SONs, and propose novel approaches along with promising research directions. A summary of those SON-sp eciﬁc c hallenges, potential solution s and open research q uestions is presen ted in Table II. Nowadays, the development and standardization activities of true SON solutions are still facing some key challen ges. Notably, future commu nication systems are becoming inc reasingly complex as a result of supporting new ecosystems with huge information ﬂow. A nother challenge is that communication systems, as machines, do not have self-c onsciousness and th ey may act chaotically in unexpec te d situations. A classical example is the sema ntics, particularly the tr a nslation of homonyms. This increases the risk of control loss. Advancing self-organization capabilities will also need to deal with the interoperability issues. Despite the uptake of new communication systems, some fundamental services will continue to rely on legacy technologies as the case of voice services. For this reason, forthcoming sophisticated SONFs need to be backward compatible with the older ones. It is also noteworthy that selforganization is a process that spans various c ompone nts and functions in the end-to-end mobile a rchitecture. This makes it very difﬁcult to design a holistic and turnkey SON solution. Finally, the full po te ntial of SONs will only be achieved if they can continuously manage computationally expensive optimizations bec a use future systems must provide quasiinstantaneous responsiveness. The self-organization paradigm is expe cted to leverage the power of H-SON with its enabling technologies that will emerge within the next decade, as listed below. Evolved H-SON s. Futur e communication system s call for a more seamless and adaptive H-SON to be tter balance the SONFs between the higher and lower levels. The conceptu al ﬁxed levels o f self- organization functionality can be made more ﬂexible during the run-time phase depending on the application being considered. Departing fro m th e predeﬁned levels at the design stage (e.g., the four abstraction levels of GANA [9]), real- time self-organization can scale up and down adaptively on the transmission time interval (TTI) timescale based on service needs to enable an efﬁcient reactive selfcoordination. More reference levels can be initially deﬁned to include more use cases and enable cross-laye r interactions. This tactical layers elasticity will reduce SON signaling, and can guarantee backward c ompatibility with legacy SONFs that have their own management levels even in run-time situations and immediate demands. Below, we share some enabling technologies that may deliver the ﬂexibility needed in evolved H-SONs. Virtualized, containerized, and multi-tenant architectures. Virtualization, con ta inerization and multi-tenancy approach e s are expected to be largely adopted. Accordingly, the use o f COTS equipment from any vendor will potentially facilitate self-coordination capabilities because the network control p a rameters (NCPs) will be similar amo ng various network e le ments. This can also reduce the parameter types to be controlled, and alleviate multi-vendor compatibility issues [12]. On the downside, different SONFs can access the same database and conseque ntly compromise eac h other’s security. Quantum technology. Self-coordina tion usually needs to solve complex optimiz ation pro blems, which can be resolved with quantum computing ( Q C). QC techniqu es exploit the superpo sition of quantum states to concurrently explore different possibilities to quickly arrive at an optimal solution. In this perspective, QC will reduce computation cost (e.g., complex calculations) and the overall latency of the network (e.g., overheads of various layers) especially in virtualized and cloudiﬁed networks [13]. This can enhance both proactive and reactive coordina tion algorithms in extremely dynamic environments. However, quantum devices need to run under cryoge nic temperatures or very high pressures. They are still in early d evelopment stages. On the other hand, quantum communication techniques use entanglement for quantum key distribution to support secure information exchange in emerging networks. Such techniques can achieve secure optimizations by enabling secure exchange of the inherent metrics and decisions. Federated and transfer learning. Federated learn ing c an simplify ne twork automa tion by processing learning models (e.g., on COTS har dware installed at the edge) instead of handling large tra ining datasets to redu ce the time and energy costs of the proac tive self-coordination. Further, transfer learning will allow capitalizing on the experience gained in avoiding or r esolving previous SON con ﬂicts to addre ss new but similar ones [2]. Extended reality (XR) based simulations. XR environments can simulate or emulate realistic scenarios in which a network equipment operates under typical real-time conditions. The resulting observations can be further improved using knowledge and experience gained from historical information of similar equipment together with contextual data provided by AI technique s. This can enhance the predeﬁned rules and policies implemen ted at the design stage to identif y potential SONFs conﬂicts. Collective intelligence. Conventional AI tec hniques are leveraged by each SONF to selﬁshly beneﬁt its own actions, and can cooperate with the remaining SONFs for global performance. Consequently, SONs will need to handle an inherent communication overhead. In the next decade, self-coordination will leverage the power of the collective intelligence wherein local informatio n (e.g., current and historical parameters and observations) are the basis for each SONF to decide on its optimal actions that con structively impact the entire SON functioning withou t the need for direct communications be twe en the involved SONFs [14]. T his can enable a truly proactive coordination of various SONFs with minimum or no overhead and loose c oupling. For instance, the whole SON can be modelled based on a game-theoretic approach a nd then deep reinfor c ement learning techniques can be applied to converge to the optimal action for each SONF. This combination has been succe ssfully explored in [1 5] for the case of inter-cell interference avoidance. However, research still needs to deal with the slow convergence spee d of evolution ary me thods and neural networks (e .g., via ofﬂine training), and minimize the amount of data loc ally nee ded to achieve the glo bal beneﬁt. Sustainability and energy efﬁciency. T here is always an interplay between network performance and the correspondin g energy efﬁciency [2]. One way to resolve the potential conﬂicts is to deﬁne priorities. Coordination between SONFs attempting to optimize performance and others attempting to optimize energy usage will be an important area o f future work given a goal of sustainable networks. Human factor. SONs aim at reducing human intervention in system optimizatio n related tasks, but a human in the self-coordination proc ess is indispensab le to prevent system malfunction since machines cannot be endowed with selfconsciousness [6]. For a suc cessful operational mode, human intervention should be in the highest level loops, and ideally should not in tervene at the lowest levels characterized by tigh ter constraints in terms of sp eed and responsiveness. Moreover, an d besides autono mous learning, human experts can also contribute to en riching the coordination rules fe d into the network. In this paper we analyzed the problem of managing complex networks m ore efﬁciently. As it can be seen from history, a potential solution is H-SON, which combines weak centralized control and distributed control so that the different feedback loops are almost isolated from each other to guarantee the stability o f the network. Thus we discuss the potential and the promises of H-SONs for an improved self-coordination to avoid and resolve p ossible conﬂicts. We provided an indepth landscape analysis of past and current standardization activities related to SONs and th e inherent self-coordination functionality within various stan dardization organization s to explore the harmoniza tion possibilities. Finally, we summarized the challenges and the future technological trends for the development of SONs over the next decade. An important challenge is to adap t the network to the corr e ct degree of centralization between centr alized and distributed networks depending on the situation in the network environment. This work was supported in part by the EU Horizon 2020 project DEDICAT 6G under Grant no. 101016499.