<title>On ductile-regime elliptical vibration cutting of silicon with identifying  the lower bound of practical nominal cutting velocity </title> <title>Abstract </title> This study investigates the ductile-to-brittle transition behavior in elliptical vibration cutting  (EVC) of silicon and identifies the practical process window for ductile-regime cutting. EVC  has been reported to increase the critical depth of ductile-regime cutting of silicon. This study  demonstrates  that  the  enhanced  ductile  cutting  performance,  however,  is  only  optimal  in  a  carefully-determined process window. The vibration amplitudes and nominal cutting velocity  have significant impacts on the ductile-to-brittle transition behaviors. Systematic experiments  covering  a  wide  span  of  vibration  amplitudes  and  cutting  velocity  have  been  conducted  to  investigate their effects. Two quantitative performance indices, the critical depth and ductile  ratio, are utilized to analyze cutting performance by considering two unique characteristics of  elliptical  vibration  cutting,  i.e.,  the  time-varying  undeformed  chip  thickness  and  effective  cutting direction angle. The results show that there exists a lower bound for the nominal cutting  velocity to ensure the ductile-regime material removal, besides the well-known upper bound.  Besides,  the  increases  of  vibration  amplitudes  in  both  the  cutting  and  depth-of-cut  (DOC)  directions first enhance but then deteriorate the cutting performance. Based on the theoretical  analysis and experimental results, the optimal process parameters have been recommended for  the elliptical vibration cutting of silicon.  Keywords: Elliptical vibration cutting; brittle materials; silicon; ductile regime.  <title>Nomenclature: </title> <title>1. Introduction </title> Silicon, as a brittle material with intrinsic low fracture toughness, is difficult for mechanical  machining to generate a crack-free surface. Fang and Venkatesh (1998) reported that with the  increase of undeformed chip thickness, the material removal mechanism of silicon undergoes a  transition from the ductile regime to the brittle regime. Fang et al. (2007) demonstrated from  machining  tests  on  silicon  that,  in  the  ductile  regime,  silicon  is  removed  through  plastic  deformation  due  to  phase  transformation  to  obtain  a  crack-free  surface;  while  in  the  brittle  regime, the silicon surface severely fractures due to the crack propagation. Traditionally, the  finishing of silicon surfaces mainly replies on polishing to remove subsurface cracks induced  by preceding machining processes such as grinding and lapping. Alternatively, ultra-precision  machining using a single point diamond tool has been proposed to direct machine silicon in  ductile-regime  at  a  very  fine  scale  to  achieve  nanometric  surface  finish  due  to  the  extreme  sharpness of the tool. Abdulkadir et al. (2018) performed a critical review on ductile-regime  cutting of silicon. They suggested that the ultra-precision diamond cutting eliminates the multistep machining steps in the grinding/lapping and polishing combinations and provides unique  advantages in  terms of  stringent  form  accuracy  and  high  flexibility.  However,  owing  to  the  small  ductile-to-brittle  transition  distance,  the  depth-of-cut  (DOC)  in  single-point  diamond  cutting of silicon is strictly limited. This critical DOC separates the cutting condition from the  regime  of  plastic  deformation  to  the  brittle  fracture  removal,  which  restricts  the  machining  efficiency and process flexibility.   proposed to use elliptical vibration cutting to suppress the crack nucleation. Moreover, Huang  et al. (2018) explained  that, as shown in Fig.  1,  the distance  from  cutting  path to the target  surface in elliptical vibration cutting can tolerate some degrees of crack propagation. Elliptical  vibration  cutting  has  demonstrated  some  promising  results  in  ductile-regime  machining  of  brittle materials with improved critical depth. For example, Geng et al. (2020) utilized elliptical  vibration to reduce the cutting temperature and improve surface integrity in the machining of  brittle materials. Zhu et al. (2016) used elliptical vibration cutting to increase the critical depth  of silicon from 58 nm to 745 nm compared with conventional diamond cutting. Zhang et al.  (2017) applied elliptical vibration cutting for micro-structured surface texturing of silicon with  the improvement ratio of critical depth of up to 12.5 times.   In elliptical vibration cutting, the process parameters, including the nominal cutting velocity  and  vibration  amplitudes  deterministically  affect  the  ductile-to-brittle  transition  behavior  of  brittle materials such as silicon, and ultimately define the quality of machined surfaces. Suzuki  et  al.  (2004)  experimentally  studied  the  elliptical  vibration  cutting  performance  of  tungsten  carbide  and  zirconia  ceramics.  Their  results  showed  that  elliptical  vibration  cutting  could  improve the surface quality only if the vibration amplitude in the DOC direction is comparable  to  the  size  of material  grains. As  a  follow-up, Zhang  et  al.  (2014)  also  conducted  elliptical  vibration cutting experiments on tungsten carbide to explore the effects of elliptical amplitudes  on the critical depth. They demonstrated that the vibration amplitudes in both the cutting and  DOC  directions  significantly  affect  the  surface  quality  of  tungsten  carbide  processed  by  vibration  cutting.  Moreover,  Nath  et  al.  (2011)  investigated  the  effects  of  nominal  cutting  velocity  on  the  ductile-regime  cutting  performance.  The  results  indicated  that  the  nominal  cutting  velocity  must  be  kept  below  a  critical  value  to  improve  the  critical depth,  which  is  known as the upper bound of practical nominal cutting velocity to ensure the performance of  elliptical vibration cutting.  Several attempts have been made to explain the deterministic effects of process parameters  on the  ductile-to-brittle transition  behavior  in elliptical  vibration cutting  of brittle  materials.  Nath et al. (2011) developed a model by analyzing the undeformed chip thickness to calculate  the critical nominal cutting velocity. If the nominal cutting velocity exceeds the critical value,  there is a sharp increase of undeformed chip thickness within a vibration cycle. Huang et al.  (2018)  also  studied  the  effects  of  nominal  cutting  velocity  and  vibration  amplitudes  on  the  critical  depth  by  analyzing  undeformed  chip  thickness.  Their  model  demonstrated  that  the  critical depth increases with the cutting-direction vibration amplitude and the nominal cutting  velocity. Besides, Zhang et al. (2019) utilized a criterion based on the specific cutting energy  to model the critical depth for elliptical vibration cutting of reaction-bonded silicon carbide.  The above three theoretical studies based on the analysis of undeformed chip thickness partially  explained the effects of process parameters on ductile-regime cutting of silicon; however, the  experimental verifications were not comprehensive enough to account for the interactive effects  of process parameters. Moreover, Dai et al. (2019) utilized molecular dynamics simulation to  understand the effects of elliptical vibration on the material behavior of silicon in nano-cutting.  The applicable DOC in the simulation, however, was limited by the computing power as small  as 1.5 nm, which is far from the microscale DOC in practice.   The  existing  knowledge  regarding  the  ductile-to-brittle  transition  behavior  in  elliptical  vibration cutting of brittle materials, especially silicon, is still very limited, which leads to some  inconsistent  and  contradictory  results  regarding  its  ductile-regime  cutting  performance. As  reported by Wang et al. (2018), silicon surfaces machined by elliptical vibration cutting were  totally fractured, even the adopted nominal cutting velocity was kept smaller than its critical  value. As this study is to show, which has not been reported before, the nominal cutting velocity  also  has  a  lower  bound  below  which  the  machined  surface  will  be  severely  fractured.  One  possible  reason  for  the  lack  of  full  understanding  is  the  scattered  experimental  design  in  available  studies,  failing  to  cover  a  wide  range  of  process  parameters  in  elliptical  vibration  cutting.  Besides,  most  research  has  been  focused  only  on  the  analysis  of  undeformed  chip  thickness. Another essential process characteristic, namely the time-varying effective cutting  direction, has  not  been well considered. The time-varying cutting direction correlates to  the  effective  rake  angle,  which  affects  the  stress  state  at  the  cutting  zone.  Its  influence  on  the  ductile-to-brittle transition behavior should not be ignored.  Moreover,  as  demonstrated  by  Gu  et  al.  (2018),  most  studies  only  utilized  a  onefold  performance index, i.e.,  the critical depth to  characterize the grooved  surface to explore the  process effects on the ductile-to-brittle transition of silicon. However, the critical depth alone  cannot adequately describe the material removal state in the more complicated case for elliptical  vibration cutting. Yuan et al. (2015) utilized a ductile-to-brittle ratio to characterize the material  removal state in ultrasonic grinding  of ceramics  composites. This  method is adopted in  this  study to add a quantitative metric for the evaluation of machined surface quality.  This study presents the surface quality evaluation in the elliptical vibration cutting of silicon,  particularly in an attempt to answer the question of how the vibration amplitudes and nominal  cutting velocity affect the ductile-to-brittle transition behavior. The experimental design covers  a  wide  span  of  process  parameters,  up  to  one  hundred  sets  of  grooving  tests  with  distinct  combinations of different elliptical vibration trajectories and nominal cutting velocities. The  critical depth and the ductile ratio of machined surfaces are used as the metrics to quantitatively  study the material transition behavior in elliptical vibration cutting of silicon. Besides, both the  time-varying undeformed chip thickness and the effective cutting direction are evaluated. The  optimal process parameters to achieve the best ductile cutting performance are recommended  based on our findings.  <title>2. Experimental design  Inclined grooving tests are used in this study to investigate the ductile-to-brittle transition  characteristics  in  silicon  cutting  under  different  vibration  trajectories  and  nominal  cutting  velocities.  The  experiments  are  systematically  designed  to  cover  a  wide  span  of  process  parameters  (up  to  100  sets  of  experiments)  due  to  the  highly  complicated  behavior  in  the  ductile-regime cutting, as analyzed above. The critical depth and the ductile ratio are adopted  as the characteristic performance indices to identify the process window for elliptical vibration  cutting of silicon in ductile-regime. </title> Two  quantitative  indices,  the  critical  depth  and  ductile  ratio,  are  adopted  to  describe  the  characteristics of machined surfaces, considering the complexity of material removal states in  elliptical vibration cutting. Fig. 2(a) and 2(b) demonstrate a representative optical image of the  machined silicon groove and its cutout image, respectively. To identify the material removal  state from the surface morphology, the  binarization method has been utilized to process the  optical image by setting a grayscale threshold at 100. The resulting binary image is shown in  Fig. 2(c).     (1)  a R R w   where  A  and A  are the ductile removal area and total area, respectively, as shown in Fig.  2(c). A is determined from the white pixel counts in the binary image, while the total area  is the summation of the white and black pixels.  The critical depth and ductile ratio should be utilized together to characterize the ductile-tobrittle transition of  machined surfaces in  elliptical  vibration cutting of brittle  materials. The  material removal state in conventional diamond cutting of brittle materials is regarded to transit  from perfect ductile-regime (ductile ratio = 100%) to brittle-regime with the increase of cutting  depth.  In  this  case,  only  the  critical  depth  is  sufficient  to  characterize  the  ductile-to-brittle  transition of machined surfaces. However, as this study is to show, the material removal state  of machined surfaces in elliptical vibration cutting becomes more complicated. On the one hand,  an  apparent  ductile-to-brittle  transition  of  material  removal  state  can  be  identified  from  the  sharp variation of machined surface quality with the increase of  cutting depth. On the other  hand, the machined surface morphology is often not in perfect ductile-regime even if the cutting  depth  is  minimal.  Hence,  in  this  study,  the  critical  depth  and  ductile  ratio  are  utilized  synergistically to evaluate the ductile-to-brittle transition of machined surfaces.   The  experimental  schematic  and  platform  are  described  as  follows.  Fig.  4(a)  shows  the  principle  of  inclined  groove  cutting,  where  a  2-D  ultrafast  vibration  cutting  tool  is  used  to  provide prescribed elliptical trajectories. The ultrafast tool is designed by Wang et al. (2019) to  have a frequency bandwidth of up to 6 kHz and a workspace of 16 μm × 10 μm to generate  high-frequency elliptical vibration in a fully controllable manner. The workpiece, pre-polished  silicon wafer with the surface roughness better than 0.5 nm, has a crystal plane of (100). It is  tilted  at  an  angle  of  0.002  radians  (2  μm/mm)  to  introduce a  gradual  increase  of  DOC. All  cuttings are performed along the crystal orientation of [110].  Fig.  4(b)  shows  a  detailed  view  of  the  actual  setup  for  grooving  tests. A  single-crystal  diamond insert with a nose radius R of 470 µm, rake angle γ  of -20° and clearance angle of  10°,  is  mounted  on  the  ultrafast  tool. The  tool  is  stationed  on  a  linear  driver  (ACT165DL,  Aerotech, Pittsburgh, USA), which is used to generate the nominal cutting motion. The silicon  workpiece is glued on a two-degree-of-freedom leveling stage, which adjusts the slope angle  of the workpiece to 0.002 radians. The leveling stage is mounted on a three-axis positioning  platform (ANT165XY and ANT165LZ, Aerotech, Pittsburgh, USA), which  sets the nominal  DOC and cross-feed.  Five  groups  of  grooving  tests  were  performed  with  all  the  combinations  of  process  parameters summarized in Table. 1. First, the grooving tests with conventional diamond cutting  without  elliptical  vibration  were  performed  to  set  the  baseline  performance.  The  second  experimental group was designed to identify the effects of nominal cutting velocity by using a  set of fixed elliptical trajectories (vibration amplitude in cutting direction a=3 μm, vibration  amplitude in DOC direction b=0.5, 1, or 2 μm) with thirteen different nominal cutting velocity  ranging  from 0.02  mm/s  to  3  mm/s. The last  three  groups  were  designed  to  investigate  the  effects of the elliptical trajectory shape. The vibration amplitude in the cutting direction was set  from 0.5 μm to 4 μm with an increment interval of 0.5 μm, while the vibration amplitude in the  DOC direction was set at 0.5, 1, and 2 μm. In addition, each group of tests utilized a different  nominal cutting velocity at 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 mm/s respectively to analyze the interactive effects  of cutting velocity and vibration amplitudes.  The tool vibration frequency was kept at 2000 Hz for all grooving tests. The actual elliptical  trajectories  were  measured  before  cutting  to  ensure  the  conformity  using  two  capacitance  displacement sensors (MicroSense, USA). The measurement trajectories are plotted in Fig. 5.  Each cutting test was repeated twice. The machined surface was  then inspected by a digital  microscope (Hirox RH-2000, Tokyo, Japan).  <title>3. Analysis of the ductile-to-brittle transition in silicon cutting </title> There are both similarities and distinctions with regards to the cutting mechanism between  conventional diamond machining and elliptical vibration cutting of silicon in the ductile regime.  The  ductile-to-brittle  transition  behavior  of  silicon  cutting  with  elliptical  vibration  can  be  analyzed based on the differentiation of these similarities and distinctions. In  this section, a  theoretical  model  is  established  to  describe  the  unique  cutting  characteristics  of  elliptical  vibration cutting over the conventional cutting. Then, the ductile cutting criteria of silicon with  elliptical  vibration  is  derived  based  on  the  proposed  model  and  compared  to  the  existing  knowledge in conventional cutting.  In addition to the chip thickness, the tool rake angle is another factor that critically determines  the material removal state. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), the rounded cutting edge (due to the finite  edge radius) with a radius r introduces a negative effective rake angle γ , which can generate  both high hydrostatic pressure and shear stress on materials below the cutting edge. Yan et al.  (2009) demonstrated that the high hydrostatic pressure facilitates the phase transformation of  silicon to a metallic phase and shields the propagation of cracks to avoid brittle fracture, while  the shear stress prompts the plastic deformation of the metallic phase to induce chip flow in the  ductile  regime.  In  practice,  according  to  the  experimental  results  from  Yan  et  al.  (2001),  a  moderate negative rake angle (−20°~−50°) is preferred for ductile-regime cutting.  3.2 Unique characteristics in elliptical vibration cutting   When  it  comes  to  the  elliptical  vibration  cutting  of  silicon  in  the  ductile  regime,  the  underlying mechanisms become more complicated due to the unique overlapping trajectory of  the tool. The moving tool trajectories are determined by the process parameters including the  nominal cutting velocity v , vibration frequency f, vibration amplitudes a and b in the cutting  and DOC directions as expressed by the following equations,  sin 2 2 x a ft ft   where t denotes time. As shown in Fig. 6(b) and Eq. (3), it is worth noting that  v  and f act  synergistically as v /f to determine the moving trajectory of the diamond tool.  The  overlapping  tool  trajectory  in  elliptical  vibration  cutting  results  in  two  unique  characteristics,  the  time-varying  undeformed  chip  thickness  and  the  time-varying  effective  cutting  direction.  Fig.  7  shows  a  simplified  model  to  illustrate  the  above  two  time-varying  parameters. When the nominal DOC, a , is smaller than the vibration amplitude b in the DOC  direction, the instantaneous undeformed chip thickness in the current cutting cycle increases  from zero to  the  maximum  value  h .  It  then decreases  to zero,  while the effective  cutting  direction  changes  from  the  horizontal  direction  to  an  oblique  direction.  However, when  the  DOC, a , is larger than the vibration amplitude b in the DOC direction, there will be a sudden  increase of undeformed chip thickness during the cutting cycle. The process conditions a <b  can prevent the crack-sensitive impact force  induced by the  sudden increase of undeformed  chip  thickness. According  to  Fig.  7,  the  maximum  undeformed  chip  thickness  h   and  the  average effective cutting direction denoted by θ  can be derived as,    1 1 1 h a b b          b a       (4)      arctan         1 1             Both the maximum undeformed chip thickness h  and effective cutting direction angle θ  have crucial effects on the material transition behavior of silicon cutting. Based on Eq. (4), h and θ can be analytically calculated based on the given process parameters. Their relationship  with the critical depth a  is then experimentally derived in Fig. 8. These two variables are  utilized  as  the  intermediate  variables  to  analyze  the  interrelated  effects  of  different  process  parameters  (vibration  amplitudes,  cutting  velocity, vibration  frequency,  etc.)  on  the  ductileregime cutting performance (critical depth and ductile ratio).  Intuitively,  the  reduction  of  maximum  undeformed  chip  thickness  h   seems  helpful  to  enhance  the  ductile-regime  cutting.  On  the  other  hand,  the  increase  of  the  effective  cutting  direction (θ) might result in an unfavorable cutting state as shown by the trends in Fig. 8. These  two parameters, however, are not independent as indicated by Eq. (4). They will simultaneously  affect the cutting characteristics.  First of all, the existence of chip thickness boundary (h  and h ) in conventional cutting  is  still  valid  in  elliptical  vibration  cutting.  During  a  vibration  cycle,  the  instantaneous  undeformed chip thickness will vary with time. The maximum undeformed chip thickness h is  adopted  to  represent  the  characteristic  length  scale  in  each  vibration  cycle.  It  should  be  bounded by the upper and lower limits, h  and h , as introduced in Section 3.1. The upper  bound h  ensures the length scale is small enough to favor the ductile removal, while the  lover bound h  ensures the chip formation rather than ploughing.   Secondly, the time-varying effective cutting direction in elliptical vibration cutting changes  the effective rake angle γ, which further affects chip thickness boundary (h  and h ). Due to  the slope of tool trajectories, as shown in Fig. 6(b), the effective rake angle γ is always negative  hence helps  to  increase h .  In  the meantime,  the  negative  γ might  reverse  the  friction  force  direction on the tool rake, which would reduce the hydrostatic pressure at the cutting zone and  induce crack formation. Zhang et al. (2012) established that the reverse  of friction direction  takes place when the effective cutting direction angle θ is larger than θ =45°+γ . The effective  cutting direction θ should always be kept smaller than θ , and preferably away from the critical  angle θ to keep a positive frictional force on the tool-chip interface.   In  summary,  the  two  unique  cutting  characteristics  of  elliptical  vibration  cutting  have  simultaneous and interactive  effects on the ductile-to-brittle transition of silicon.  Hence, the  improvement of the critical depth is condition-dependent. According to the analysis above, the  ductile-regime cutting criteria in terms of the undeformed chip thickness and effective cutting  direction can be summarized as,  h h h   (5)  = 50        Based on the proposed criteria in Eq.  (5) and the definitions of  h  and θ in Eq. (4), the  practical process window can be determined. The intermediate variables,  h  and θ, can be  firstly related to the actual process parameters. According to Eq. (4), h  is dependent on v /f/a  and b,  while  θ  is  dependent  on  a  and  b. The  results  are plotted in Fig.  9. At  the  meantime,  according to Eq. (5), to enhance the ductile-regime cutting of brittle materials, h  should be  bounded by h and h ; while θ should satisfy the condition θ < 25° (when γ  = −20°). These  criteria  are  utilized  together  with  the  relationship  shown  in  Fig.  9  to  analyze  the  complex  interactive  effects  of  process  parameters  on  the  ductile-regime  cutting  performance  in  the  following sections.  <title>4. Results and discussions </title> There are  four main  process  parameters  that  are  critical to  the  ductile-to-brittle transition  distance  in  elliptical  vibration  cutting  of  silicon.  They  are  the  nominal  cutting  velocity  v vibration frequency f, vibration amplitude a in the cutting direction, and vibration amplitude b  in  the  DOC  direction.  These  process  parameters  determine  the  moving  trajectory  of  the  diamond tool, hence influence the variation of undeformed chip thickness and effective cutting  direction.  Through  the  focus  on  the  two  intermediate  variables,  i.e.,  the  effective  cutting  direction  and  undeformed  chip  thickness,  here  we  present  the  experimental  results  with  the  theoretical  analysis  to  systematically  study  the  relationship  between  the  ductile-to-brittle  transition behavior and the four main process parameters.  There exists a lower bound and an upper bound of practical v /f to ensure the ductile-regime  cutting of silicon. The effects of v /f on the ductile cutting performance can be attributed to its  direct influence on the undeformed chip thickness. As indicated in Eq. (4), v /f is only related  to the maximum undeformed chip thickness h  but not to the effective cutting direction θ. The  relationship between v /f and h  is plotted in Fig. 9(a), while the experimental results with  regards to the effects of v /f on the critical depth and ductile ratio are illustrated in Fig. 10. As  shown in Fig. 9(a), h monotonically increases with v /f. Since h  has both an upper and a  lower bound to achieve the ductile cutting of silicon (h  < h  < h ), it can be derived that  there must exist an upper and a lower bound of practical v /f for the ductile-regime cutting of  silicon.  The  existence  of  the  upper  bound  of  practical  v /f  is  well-known,  which  has  also  been  reported by other researchers such as Huang et al. (2018). As shown in Fig. 10(a), v  did not  show significant influences on the critical depth in conventional diamond cutting. In contrast,  the critical depth decreased slightly with the increase of nominal cutting velocity in elliptical  vibration cutting of silicon. Due to the ductile cutting criteria h  < h , with the further  increase of v /f, it will reach the upper bound to be comparable to conventional diamond cutting.  The existence of the lower bound of v /f is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 10(b). When cutting  without vibration, though the critical depth is small at around 200 nm, the ductile ratio is up to  99.5% with good surface quality. In elliptical vibration cutting, however, the ductile ratio drops  significantly when v /f approaches 0, and then maintains around 100% when v /f exceeds 0.1  μm. For example, when v /f = 0.01 μm (a=3 μm, b=0.5, 1 or 2 μm), the achieved ductile ratio  is below 20% showing severe damage as illustrated in Fig. 3(g). Only when v /f is greater than  0.1 μm, the elliptical vibration cutting can improve the critical depth by 2~3 times compared to  conventional  diamond  cutting  with  acceptable  surface  quality  (critical  depth:  400~600  nm,  while ductile ratio >97%).  The lower bound  of  v /f results  from the minimum  chip  thickness  h . The minimum  chip  thickness effect has been extensively observed in metal cutting, such as that presented by Son  et  al.  (2005),  but  is  often  ignored  in  single  crystal  diamond  cutting.  However,  in  elliptical  vibration cutting of silicon, the effective undeformed chip thickness is comparable to the tool  edge radius due to the overlapping trajectories. The minimum chip thickness effect is significant  in the ductile-regime  cutting, resulting  in  ploughing and fractured surface. According to the  experimental results from Fang and Zhang (2003), the minimum chip thickness  h  in silicon  cutting  is  about  0.27~0.45  times  of  the  edge  radius  r,  which  is  approximately  equal  to  the  ductile-regime critical depth of conventional silicon cutting as demonstrated by Liu et al. (2007).  The increase of vibration amplitude b in the DOC direction first improves the ductile-regime  cutting of silicon and then deteriorates the cutting performance. The effects of b on the critical  depth and ductile ratio are illustrated in Fig. 11 for three different sets of v /f. The first set of  results shown in Fig. 11(a) and Fig. 11(b) are in the ploughing region as analyzed in the last  section, which results in the abnormal surface quality. Here we focus on the second and third  sets of results shown in Fig. 11(c) to Fig. 11(f) that give a clear and consistent effect of the  vibration amplitude b.  On the one hand, with the initial increase of vibration amplitude b in the DOC direction, the  ductile cutting performance of silicon is improved. As shown in Fig. 11(c) and Fig. 11(d), when  /f = 0.1 μm and 0.2 μm, the blue curve (b = 1 μm) shows consistently larger critical depth  compared with the red curve (b = 0.5 μm), while both cases have an acceptable ductile ratio  (close to 100%). This phenomenon can be directly attributed to the relationship between b and   as shown in Fig. 9(d). When b increases from 0.5 μm to 1 μm, the maximum undeformed  chip thickness h  undergoes a sharp decrease, resulting in the improvement of critical depth.   On the other hand, with the further increase of vibration amplitude b in the DOC direction,  the machined surface quality is deteriorated rapidly. As shown in Fig. 11(d) and Fig. 11(f), when  b equals to 2 μm, the ductile ratio drops significantly below 90% and becomes even worse (80%)  when the cutting velocity ratio v /f is further increased. This observation is due to the combined  effects of the increase in maximum undeformed chip thickness  h  and the effective cutting  direction angle θ, as illustrated in Fig. 9(b) and Fig. 9(d). Especially when b increases from 1  μm to 2 μm, the increase in θ leads to a sudden reverse of friction direction at the interface of  tool rake face and chips, causing the severe surface damage.  The increase of vibration amplitude a in the cutting direction will also first enhance ductileregime cutting of silicon, and then deteriorate the cutting performance. The effects of a on the  critical depth and ductile ratio are illustrated in Fig. 11. Here all six sets shown in Fig. 11 are  used to demonstrate the effect of vibration amplitude a.  On the one hand, with the initial increase of vibration amplitude a in the cutting direction,  the critical depth is improved. As shown in Fig. 11(c) to Fig. 11(f), when b= 0.5 μm and 1 μm,  the increase of vibration amplitude a from 0.5 μm to 3 μm can significantly improve the critical  depth by about three times, while the ductile ratio is close to 100%. This phenomenon can be  attributed to the combined effects of the decrease in maximum undeformed chip thickness h and effective cutting direction angle θ, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a) and Fig. 9(c). With the increase  of a, h  decreases while the upper bound h  increases due to the change of θ, resulting in  the improvement of critical depth.  On the other hand, with the further increase of vibration amplitude a in the cutting direction,  As the previous subsections demonstrate, the four key process parameters have interactive  rather than mutually independent effects on the ductile-to-brittle transition behavior in silicon  cutting with elliptical vibration. This is due to their synergic effects on the undeformed chip  thickness and the angle of effective cutting direction. The nominal cutting velocity only affects  the maximum chip thickness but not the effective cutting direction; the vibration amplitudes in  the DOC and cutting directions influence both the undeformed chip thickness and the effective  cutting direction. However, to enhance the ductile-regime cutting of silicon, the maximum chip  thickness must be bounded by the minimum chip thickness and the upper critical ductile chip  thickness,  both  of  which  are further affected by  the  effective cutting  direction. Hence,  only  when  all  the  four  key  process  parameters  are  all  adequately  determined,  the  ductile-regime  cutting of silicon can be enhanced through the introduction of elliptical vibration.   Based on the above analysis and experimental results, the optimum process parameters for  elliptical vibration cutting of silicon (crystal plane of (100) and crystal orientation of [110]) to  achieve the maximum critical depth with acceptable surface quality are obtained as follows.  The nominal cutting velocity and vibration frequency satisfy that v /f = 0.1 μm. The vibration  amplitude  in  the  DOC  direction  b  equals  to  1  μm.  The  vibration  amplitude  in  the  cutting  direction a equals  to  4 μm. With this set of process parameters,  the critical depth of  silicon  cutting in the ductile-regime can reach up to 700 nm.   It  is  worth mentioning  that  the  ductile-to-brittle  transition  behavior  of  silicon  varies  with  different crystal orientations in ductile-mode diamond cutting. As reported by Shamoto et al.  (2014), the crystal  orientation  also  affects the critical depth  in  elliptical  vibration  cutting of  silicon. The results derived in this study are based on the cutting direction of [110] in the crystal  plane of (110). The  major findings  – (1) the existence of a  lower bound  of  nominal  cutting  velocity and (2) the relation between the vibration amplitudes and critical DOC – are universal  to all crystal orientations. The quantitative effects of crystal orientation on the lower bound of  nominal  cutting  velocity  are  worthy  of  future  investigation  by  following  the  experimental  procedure and data processing methods proposed in this study.  <title>5. Conclusions </title> The minimum chip thickness and time-varying effective cutting direction have not been well  considered in previous studies of elliptical vibration cutting of silicon, which leads to some  inconsistent and contradictory  results regarding its ductile-regime cutting performance. This  study is devoted to the experimental and theoretical investigation of ductile-to-brittle transition  behavior  in  the  elliptical  vibration  cutting  of  silicon,  with  synergic  consideration  of  the  undeformed  chip  thickness  and  time-varying  effective  cutting  direction.  Systematic  experiments have been performed to cover a wide span of process parameters. The effects of  process parameters such as the nominal cutting velocity and elliptical trajectory on the critical  depth and the ductile ratio of the machined surface have been evaluated. The conclusions can  be drawn as follows:   (1) Elliptical vibration cutting has two unique characteristics over the conventional cutting,  namely the reduced maximum chip thickness and enlarged effective cutting direction angle. To  enhance the ductile-regime cutting of silicon, the maximum chip thickness in elliptical vibration  cutting must be bounded between the minimum chip thickness and the upper critical ductile  chip thickness. However, the enlarged effective cutting direction angle narrows the practical  boundary  of  maximum  chip  thickness.  If  process  parameters  are  not  correctly  determined,  elliptical vibration cutting shows worse ductile-regime cutting performance over conventional  diamond cutting due to its complex cutting characteristics.  (2) The nominal cutting velocity in elliptical vibration cutting only affects the maximum chip  thickness but not the effective cutting direction. There exists a lower bound of nominal cutting  velocity to enhance the ductile-regime cutting of silicon, besides the well-known upper bound.  If the nominal cutting velocity is smaller than the lower bound value, the machined surface will  be severely damaged.  (3)  The  increases  of  vibration  amplitudes  in  both  the  DOC  and  cutting  directions  first  enhance but then deteriorate the cutting performance, due to their simultaneous influences on  the effective cutting direction and undeformed chip thickness.   (4) The initial increase of vibration amplitude in the cutting direction reduces the undeformed  chip thickness that accounts for the improvement of critical depth. Its further increase, however,  reduces the undeformed chip thickness towards the minimum chip thickness, which violates  the stable cutting condition.   (5) The initial increase of vibration amplitude in the DOC direction also improves the critical  depth due to the sharp reduction of undeformed chip thickness. However, its further increase  deteriorates the surface quality severely due to the reverse of friction direction on the tool rake.  <title>Acknowledgments </title> This research was supported by the start-up fund from McCormick School of Engineering,  Northwestern  University,  Evanston,  IL,  USA;  the  Innovation  and  Technology  Fund,  Hong  Kong, #ITS/076/1; and the Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, Chinese University  of Hong Kong (# RNE-p4-17).  <title>References </title>