<title>Voter Perceptions of Trust in Risk-Limiting Audits</title> <title>1 Introduction</title> <title>arXiv:2109.07918v1  [cs.CY]  15 Sep 2021</title> strengthen public conﬁdence in the election, ﬁrst, because they can be integrated into existing election processes, for example, in Denmark, where the result of the ﬁrst (rough) count can be veriﬁed during the second (ﬁne) count [10]. Second, some of the ceremonies surrounding RLAs can be turned into public events, such as the dice-rolling ceremony used to create entropy to select a random sample (see the public notice of the Colorado Secretary of State [5]). But do RLAs really strengthen public conﬁdence? Of course, from a statistical point of view, they do. The theory is sound and the sample size is mathematically determined once the (diluted) margin and the risk limit are known. And yet, often, the sample size is ridiculously small, especially when the margins are wide, leading us to wonder if voters ﬁnd those numbers convincing and conﬁdenceraising. In Denver County, Colorado, USA, where nearly 393,826 votes were cast during the 2020 election, the RLA that was conducted shortly after the election required a sample size of 523 votes to achieve a 96% conﬁdence (risk limit 0.04) that the election result was correct. In Kenya, during the Presidential Election of October 2017, where 15,593,050 votes were cast, a hypothetical RLA would need to sample only 166 ballots to achieve a conﬁdence of 99% (risk limit 0.01) in a best case scenario. To answer the research question if RLAs really strengthen public conﬁdence in the outcome of an election, we conducted a user study with 105 randomly chosen US residents across all demographics using the Proliﬁc platform. The participants in this study conﬁrm several hypothesis, such as where we asked the participants about their opinion on the number of ballots to be selected for auditing, they provided a number higher than the number prescribed by the RLA methodology and where we found that the participants’ conﬁdence in the audit results changed when they were informed about the number of ballots selected for auditing. The quantitative and qualitative analysis conﬁrmed both hypotheses. In this paper we describe the user study and its results. We give a brief introduction to RLAs and how they work in Section 2, before we outline the methodology for this user study in Section 3. We report on results in Section 4 and assess the impact of our ﬁndings in Section 5. <title>2 Background</title> Post-election audits are a common part of election cycles around the world. They are designed to inform oﬃcials if there has been a problem with electronic voting or counting machines, they can act as a deterrent against fraud, and overall they are expected to increase public conﬁdence into the election result. Trust and public conﬁdence in correct outcomes, a human trait that is particularly aﬀected by the use of (election) technologies whose inner workings are neither transparent nor easily understandable, have been studied in general terms [12] and in terms of Internet Voting [2, 7, 13,14], where there are no paper ballots available. If paper ballots (hand-marked or machine-marked) are available, they can be audited in diﬀerent post-election audits, which we discuss next. What constitutes a post election audit diﬀers from country to country. In some countries, e.g., in Denmark, Germany, Norway, post-election audits are an integral part of the counting and tabulation process, and executed every time an election is held. In other countries there are clear rules when a recount is triggered, (a) if the margin is below 0.5%, (b) at the discretion of the Secretary of State, or (c) if voters ﬁle a petition. In the US, each state has their own local regulatory framework that deﬁnes who decides if a recount takes place, how many ballots are to be audited, from where these ballots are drawn, and who is going to pay for the recount. Lastly, there are many countries in the world, especially in developing and post-conﬂict countries, where there are no provisions for recounts at all. In 2012, Lindeman and Stark [6], devised a novel statistic-based method for election auditing, which is called a risk-limiting audit (RLA). The advantages of an RLA are plentiful. It is the only method that can provide statistically valid evidence supporting the correctness of an election outcome, and it is also the only method that can correct an erroneous election outcome. Without going into details or the diﬀerent ﬂavors of RLAs that exist, an RLA requires voter veriﬁed paper ballots, i.e. ballots that represent the intent of the voter, and it requires that the integrity of the paper trail is established and trusted. An RLA is administered by the following procedure: Given a risk-limit that deﬁnes the likelihood with which the RLA will recognize and correct an erroneous election outcome, and given the smallest margin between winners and losers, the RLA then (1) computes the sample size of ballots to be drawn random, where it has become customary to create the entropy using several 10-sided dice, and (2) identiﬁes the individual ballots to be drawn. RLAs can be used when ballots are identiﬁable, for example in UK elections where ballot papers are numbered or when ballots are sorted into batches. The actual audit consists of locating the physical ballots in the random sample, and then checking if they are correctly interpreted (digitally) or correctly sorted into batches. RLAs were introduced in 2012 and are now regularly used in diﬀerent US states for auditing US presidential, congressional, and local elections. One of the reasons why RLAs are used predominately in the US, is because ballots usually contain multiple races, which renders manual counting and tabulation impossible. Since ballots are digitally interpreted and electronically counted, RLAs provide a transparent way to ensure that the results are correct. Recent election observation reports [3, 4] noted a trend towards hand-marked paper ballots and RLAs. According to the National Conference of State Legislatures [8], the use of RLAs is in statute for the three states, Colorado, Rhode Island, and Virginia. The statutory pilot programs are run in Georgia, Indiana, and Nevada whereas the use of RLAs is optional in California, Ohio, Oregon and Washington. In contrast, Michigan and New Jersey are running only administrative pilot programs, similar to the one, we conducted in Denmark [10]. For a detailed description of risk-limiting audits and its application in other countries, see [11]. Risk-limiting audits are currently considered as the gold standard among post-election audits because it is statistically sound, veriﬁable, and reproducible, given the entropy used for selecting the random sample. However, besides all the mathematical rigor, there is also a psychological side to an RLA: If the respective margin between winners and losers is wide, the number of ballots to be audited is actually really small. For example, in Kenya, the Presidential Election of 2017 reported that Uhuru Kenyatta obtained 8,223,369 votes, whereas his opponent Raila Odinga obtained 6,822,812 votes, which yields a margin of 1,400,557 votes. When setting the risk-limit to 1%, the ballot-level comparison RLA reports a sample size of 166 ballots. For some, considering that 15,593,050 ballots were cast, drawing only 166 ballots to verify such an important election may sound unbelievable, untrustworthy, and perhaps even unacceptable. <title>3 Methodology</title> We describe the online survey, including the study hypotheses. The study was conducted as an online survey and consisted of the following parts: General audits The participants were presented with a scenario about a hypothetical election with the following description: Consider the following scenario: an election was conducted, with a total of [ NUM VOTERS ] voters casting their votes in favour of either candidate A or candidate B. After the count, candidate A got [ MARGIN ] votes more than candidate B, so candidate A was announced as the winner of the election. The values of NUM VOTERS and MARGIN were dynamically generated for each new participant at random, with NUM VOTERS uniformly generated from the range between 2 900 000 and 3 100 000, and MARGIN uniformly selected to be in the range of 0% to 20% of the total vote (that is, modeling elections with two candidates where the share of votes for a winning candidate is between 50% and 60% of total cast votes) .After presenting the scenario, the participants were asked whether they believed that an election audit would be a good idea if the candidate they supported lost the described election (Likert 5-point scale, from “deﬁnitely not” to “deﬁnitely yes”) and were asked to explain their answer. RLA Afterwards, the participants were presented with the same election scenario once again. This time, they were being told that the election oﬃcials are planning to conduct a risk-limiting audit: After the election, the (election) authorities decided to conduct an audit known as a Risk Limiting Audit (RLA). This audit manually reviews a sample of ballots, to check whether the reported election result is correct. The number of ballots for this sample is not ﬁxed but depends on the diﬀerence between the votes of the two candidates. The participants were then asked whether such an audit would strengthen their conﬁdence in the election result (Likert 5-point scale, from “deﬁnitely not” to “deﬁnitely yes”), and how much time they believed it should take for the election oﬃcials to announce the results of the audit. Afterwards, they were asked to estimate the minimum number of ballots that should be sampled for such an audit, providing a number from 0 to NUM VOTERS . Following that question, the participants were provided with the following description of the audit procedure: The auditors draw and inspect a random sample of [ NUM AUDITED ] ballots and conclude that they are 99% certain that the election outcome is correct. The value of NUM AUDITED was dynamically computed based on the values of NUM VOTERS and MARGIN , following the methodology described in Section 2 to ensure the 99% conﬁdence, which corresponds to a risk limit of 1%. The participants were asked once again, whether such an audit would improve their conﬁdence in the election result (Likert 5-point scale, from “deﬁnitely not” to “deﬁnitely yes”) and were requested to explain their answer. Selection criteria In the next part, the participants were presented with a list of criteria that could have been used for choosing the number of audited ballots, namely, (a) recommendation by NGOs and international organizations, (b) existing legislation, (c) methodology described in a scientiﬁc paper, openly available online, (d) court decision, (e) mutual agreement among all the political parties involved in the election and (f) recommendation by independent experts. For each of the criteria, the participants were asked how their reliance on it would aﬀect their conﬁdence in the election results (Likert 7-point scale, from “I would be much less conﬁdent” to “I would be much more conﬁdent”) and were requested to explain their answer. The participants were then asked to provide other criteria they could think of that might be important to them as free-text answers. Demographics To conclude the survey, the participants were asked about their demographics, namely, gender, age, education, country of residence, and, if they are registered as a voter in the US elections, in which state and for which party they are registered. They were also asked whether they had any further remarks regarding the survey, and to elaborate as a free-text answer. The aim of our study was to investigate the voters’ mental models of election audits, in particular, focusing on the misalignment of the assurances provided by the RLAs and their perceptions among the potential voters. Speciﬁcally, we investigate whether the number of ballots required to be chosen by the RLA methodology is considered satisfactory by the voters, formulating the following main hypotheses for the quantitative evaluation: In addition to these hypotheses, we consider further aspects that might aﬀect the voters’ conﬁdence in the election audits. We consider the eﬀects on voters’ conﬁdence in the election audits in cases when the methodology of the audits is supported by one or more of the selection criteria, that is, entities or processes presented to the participants in the surveys as criteria for choosing the number of ballots that should be audited. Finally, given the political landscape of the US elections, we study whether the party aﬃliation has an eﬀect on the acceptance of audits. Thereby resulting in the following additional hypotheses: In addition to this, we do a qualitative evaluation of open-ended answers to understand the attitudes towards election audits. The survey was conducted in March 2021, and the participants for the study were recruited using the Proliﬁc platform . The recruitment was done in two stages: (1) in the pilot stage, ﬁve participants were recruited to verify that there were no signiﬁcant issues with the survey, and (2) in the full study stage, 100 additional participants were recruited. As the pilot stage did not reveal any issues, the survey was not changed and the ﬁve participants from that stage were included in the overall evaluation. As we wanted to study the attitudes in the context of the US election, only participants with USA as their country of residence were allowed to participate in the survey. The survey was estimated to take 10 minutes, and participants were paid 1.25 GBP for their participation, which corresponds to the recommended reimbursement by the Proliﬁc platform. Prior to starting the survey, the participants were presented with a consent form, outlining the goals of the survey, stating that the survey will not collect any personally identiﬁable data and the anonymized results will be published in scientiﬁc reports. The participants were furthermore told that they can withdraw from the survey at any time without explanation, however, in that case they would not be able to get the reimbursement for their participation. <title>4 Results</title> A total of 105 participants completed the survey, of them 46 women, 57 men, one non-binary person, and one participant who preferred not to report their gender. The majority of the participants reported having either a Bachelor (44 participants) or a Master (22 participants) degree. The most commonly represented age group was 30-34 years (24 respondents), followed by 25-29 (20 participants) and 35-39 (16 participants). Almost a half (50 participants) reported being registered Democrats, 23 were registered as Republican and 21 as Independent, the rest of the participants chose not to report their party aﬃliation. We report on the results of evaluating the hypotheses deﬁned in Section 3.2, as well as provide other descriptive statistics from the study. The p-values for all the hypotheses are adjusted for multiple comparison using the Bonferonni-Holm method. We report the adjusted values. Note, that we report on some statistical tests not included in our hypotheses outlined in Section 3.2, but nonetheless performed to get a better understanding of our sample; these are not included in the p-value adjustment. All the statistical analysis computations are performed using R packages “rstatix”, “coin” and “PMCMR”. We did not exclude any participants from the evaluation of the hypothesis and , and excluded participants who did not provide a meaningful answer to the question that was critical for the evaluation from the analysis of the hypothesis which we describe in more details below. Preferred vs. actual number of audited ballots For the comparison between the preferred number of audited ballots and the actual number (derived according to the RLA methodology) presented to the participants after they expressed their preference, we only considered participants who, when asked about the number of ballots that they believed should be audited, reported a number larger than 0 (thus excluding participants who either skipped the question or possibly believed that the RLA should not be conducted at all). After excluding 18 participants who did not answer that question and 4 additional participants who input 0 as their answer, 83 participants were included in the evaluation. When asked which number of ballots the participants would prefer to get audited, this number tended to be magnitudes higher than the actual number required by the RLAs for most of the participants (see Figure 1). While the actual audited number of ballots presented to the participants ranged from .0016% to .08% out of total cast ballots (that is, from 51 to 2372 ballots respectively) only 6% of participants (5 out of 83) reported preferring a number of ballot less than or equal to the actual number required by the RLA methodology. Overall, the median preferred number of ballots was 6.9%, and the standard deviation was 36.3% of total number of ballots, indicating not only that participants overestimated the number of ballots required for audits, but also that they had highly varying opinions on what this number should be. The majority of the participants (57%, 48 out of 83) preferred to audit less than 10% of the total cast ballots, while 21% (18 out of 83) preferred for more than half of the total cast ballots to be audited, and of them, the majority (12 participants, 14% of 83) reported preferring a full recount. The sign test has conﬁrmed that the diﬀerence between preferred and actual number of ballots is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero ( p < . 001, 95% CI for median diﬀerence between preferred and actual ballots (as percentage of total ballots) is [3.23%, 16.1%]), thus, H is conﬁrmed. Changes in conﬁdence in RLAs While the majority of the participants (70%, 74 out of 105) had a positive attitude towards conducting RLAs, choosing either “maybe yes” or “deﬁnitely yes” as the answer to the question whether their conﬁdence in the election result would increase based on the audits, only 44% provided a positive answer to the same question asked after presenting the number of audited ballots to the participants. Consequently, while only 17% of the participants (18 out of 105) provided a negative answer (either “maybe no” or “deﬁnitely not”) before seeing the number of audited ballots, this percentage increased to 45% (47 out of 105) after the participants were presented with that number. Overall, the majority of the participants (54%, 57 out of 105), were less likely to think that RLAs would increase their conﬁdence in the election results when they were told the number of audited ballots (median decrease of 1 point on the 5-point scale). Furthermore, for 33% of the participants (35 out of 105), being told the number of ballots led to changing their attitude towards RLAs from positive (answering either “maybe yes” or “deﬁnitely yes” when asked whether RLAs would increase their conﬁdence in the election result) to negative (choosing the answers “maybe no” or “deﬁnitely not”). Figure 2 shows the distribution of changes of participants’ answers. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the “before” and “after” answers ( p < . 001, 47, eﬀect size 33, moderate), Fig. 1: Preferred (as answered by participants) and actual audited ballots (as percentage of total ballots) depending on the margin. The scale is logarithmic. Fig. 2: Percentage of participants choosing each of the combinations of their answers on whether RLAs would strengthen their conﬁdence in the election result before and after seeing the number of audited ballots. thus, is conﬁrmed . Furthermore, Spearman’s test did not show signiﬁcant correlation between conﬁdence change (as the diﬀerence between the “before” and “after” answers) and either the number of audited ballots ( 1863, 13) or the margin (p = .185, r = −.13). Selection criteria For all of the selection criteria for the number of audited ballots outlined in Section 3, namely, recommendation by NGOs and international organizations (“NGO”), existing legislation (“legislation”), methodology described in a scientiﬁc paper, openly available online (“paper”), court decision (“court”), mutual agreement among all the political parties involved in the election (“agreement”) and recommendation by independent experts (“expert”), most of the participants reported that their conﬁdence would either improve or stay the same. Namely, the median score for the selection criteria “paper”, “expert” and “agreement” was 4, meaning that the majority of the participants answered that they would feel either “much more conﬁdent” or “more conﬁdent” – if the number of audited ballots was chosen according to these criteria. For the rest of the selection criteria, the median value was 3, meaning that the majority of the participants selected one of the options “much more conﬁdent”, “conﬁdent” or “my conﬁdence would not change”. At the same time, the number of participants that answered that they would feel either “less conﬁdent” or “much less conﬁdent” if the number of audited ballots was based on speciﬁc selection criteria ranged from 5.7% (6 out of 105) for the methodology described in a scientiﬁc paper to 12% (13 out of 105) for existing legislation. The summary of the participants’ answers is provided on Figure 3. Fig. 3: Answers to the question, how choosing the number of audited ballots based on the following selection criteria would aﬀect the participants’ conﬁdence in the election result. The Friedman test comparing the scores for all the selection criteria resulted in p < . 001, with = 30 863 and the eﬀect size 07 (small). Thus, is conﬁrmed . The post-hoc tests show signiﬁcant diﬀerences between “paper” and “legislation” ( 0017), “paper” and “NGO” ( 009) and “paper” and “court” (p = .03). Party diﬀerences For the evaluation of the eﬀects of political views on attitudes towards audits and selection criteria, we exclude participants who chose not to provide their party aﬃliation (11 participants), resulting in 94 participants for the evaluation. Attitudes towards auditing in general While only 34% of all the participants who speciﬁed their party aﬃliation (32 out of 94) had positive views on audits in case their candidate lost the election (answering either “deﬁnitely yes” or “mostly yes” to the question whether such an audit would be a good idea), this number was higher among the participants who reported Republican as their party aﬃliation (61%, 14 out of 23) than among Democrats (30%, 15 out of 50) and Independents (14%, 3 out of 21), see also Figure 4. Similarly, only 35% of Republicans (8 out of 23) provided a negative answer to the same question (either “deﬁnitely not” or “mostly not”), compared to 62% of Democrats (31 out of 50) and 67% of Independents (14 out of 21). The Kruskal-Wallis test conﬁrms the signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the groups ( 015, = 10 579, eﬀect size = 0 9, moderate), thus conﬁrming H . The post-hoc tests furthermore show signiﬁcant diﬀerences between Republicans and both Democrats ( 014) and Independents (p = .016). Attitudes towards RLAs before specifying the number of audited ballots Most of the respondents across all parties had a positive attitude towards conducting RLAs in general, choosing the option either “maybe yes” or “deﬁnitely yes” when asked whether conducting such audits would strengthen their conﬁdence in the election result (66% of Democrats, 33 out of 50; 87% of Republicans, 20 out of 23; 66.7% of Independents, 14 out of 21), with participants who reported Republican as their party aﬃliation being the most likely to provide positive results (see also Figure 4). At the same time, only 9% of Republicans (2 out of 23) and 14% of Independents (3 out of 21) expressed negative attitudes towards audits in such a scenario, answering either “maybe no” or “deﬁnitely not”, compared to 22% of Democrats (11 out of 50). The Kruskal-Wallis test furthermore shows signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the groups ( 04, = 7 8192, eﬀect size 06, moderate), conﬁrming H , and post-hoc tests showing signiﬁcant diﬀerence between Republicans and Democrats (p = .029). Fig. 4: Answers to the question (left to right), whether (a) participants believed that conducting audits would be a good idea if their candidate lost the election, (b) conducting risk-limiting audits would increase the participants’ conﬁdence in the election results before specifying the number of ballots to be audited, (c) whether conducting risk-limiting audits would increase the participants’ conﬁdence in the election results (after specifying the number of ballots to be audited. We report the results of analyzing the open-ended answers of the survey. The answers were analyzed by two paper authors using open coding, and the codes were iteratively discussed until agreement was reached. We report on our ﬁndings in the subsections below. Each of the reported codes was mentioned at least by two participants. Since the goal of the qualitative evaluation is to understand the range of possible opinions, we do not report on the number of participants mentioning each code, instead using quantiﬁers according to Table 1. Attitudes towards auditing We describe the codes identiﬁed when studying the open-ended answers of participants regarding their attitudes towards auditing. Namely, we consider their opinions regarding (1) whether audits at all would be a good option, (2) whether risk-limiting audits in particular would increase Table 1: Quantiﬁers used in describing the qualitative results, by percentage of participants mentioning each code. their conﬁdence, without specifying the number of audited ballots, and whether risk-limiting audits with a speciﬁed number of audited ballots would increase their conﬁdence. For each of the three questions, we group the participants into the ones who expressed a negative (selecting either option 1 or 2 on the corresponding 5-point Likert scale), neutral (selecting option 3) or positive (selecting either option 4 or 5) opinion. Audits in general Among the participants who expressed a negative opinion (58 participants) towards audits, most mentioned the fact that the margin was suﬃciently wide. Few participants mentioned that given such a margin an audit is unlikely to change anything, or that fraud or errors of that scale would be very unlikely. Few participants mentioned negative eﬀects of audits, such as delays in announcing election results, monetary costs and overall loss of conﬁdence. Few of the participants mentioned that they trust the election system, or that an audit is not necessary unless suspicious activity takes place. Considering the answers from the participants with a neutral opinion (11 participants) towards audits, some mentioned the fact that the audit is needed if there is inconsistency or fraud in the election process. Few participants liked the idea of audits but doubted the audit process, by articulating that not enough information is given to decide need for audit. Few participants expressed that audits will not be useful as they feel conﬁdent that election was free and fair and need more information to decide the need for an audit. The participants with positive opinion (36 participants) towards audit, many remarked that audit is good for reconﬁrming election results regardless of which party wins the election. Few participants also emphasized the need of audit by stating that it will help in checking the errors which occur during the elections such as ﬂaws in the way the votes are counted and it can provide a check against irregularities that stood out from past elections. These participants opined that audits will increase the accuracy of the results. Also, a few participants mentioned that audits are necessary when the margin is too small to bring conﬁdence in the election results. Risk-limiting audits Out of 18 participants with negative attitudes towards RLAs, some mentioned that they believed the methodology is ﬂawed (e.g. saying that recounting only a sample of ballots is not enough or expressing doubts that sampling would be done in a proper way to ensure representative results, because of either lack of due diligence or malicious intent on behalf of auditing authorities). Some stated that the margin was wide enough so that no RLAs would be necessary. Few answered that they believed RLAs would not change anything in the election result, or mentioned negative eﬀects of the audits such as loss of time or conﬁdence in elections. Among the participants with a neutral opinion (13 participants) towards RLAs, some mentioned that they need more clarity on the statistical model behind the number of ballots selected, indicating that since RLA only reviews a sample of ballots; a possibility of error still exists. Furthermore, some mentioned that they trust the election results and feel that audit is not necessary as it will not solve other issues related to voting such as gerrymandering, which are shady and need ﬁxing. Few participants also opined that audit will reconﬁrm the election results but emphasized that it is not necessary to conduct. For the participants with positive opinion (74 participants), most mentioned the fact that the RLAs will help in conﬁrming the validity of the election results and give a feeling that everything was done correctly. Few of them mentioned that such reassurance of preventing irregularities will help in building the trust in the election process. On the other hand, few who liked the idea of audit, wanted more clarity on the statistical model used to determine the random sample and mentioned that sample size needs to be a true reﬂection of the electorate. Risk-limiting audits with speciﬁed number of audited ballots Out of 47 participants who expressed a negative opinion towards RLAs when shown the audited number of ballots, near-all answered that they believed that the audited number was too small, also comparing it to the margin or the total number of cast ballots, as well as providing such further explanations as the sampled number being within margin of error. Few, furthermore, mentioned that they did not believe the claims of 99% accuracy given the audit, or that they believed that auditing such a small number does not show a serious eﬀort on behalf of election authorities. Few participants furthermore stated that they believed that sampling is not good enough to conﬁrm the election result (as opposed to full recount), or, on the contrary, that audits would not be necessary at all in the described scenario. Among the participants with a neutral opinion (12 participants) towards RLAs when shown a speciﬁed number of audited ballots, most mentioned that the audited number was too small and felt that it wouldn’t aﬀect their perception about the validity of the election results in any major way. Few participants further questioned the need for conducting such audits by emphasizing that since the margin of certainty is 99% it makes little sense to conduct such audits and expressed that they would like to see the statistical method used for computing the audited number of ballots. For the participants with positive opinion (46 participants), many mentioned that the audit will reconﬁrm the election with 99% certainty and will increase their trust in the election process. A few opined that it will be value-adding if the audits are inspected by a third party to avoid potential frauds or discrepancies. Few participants who showed an inclination for audits articulated the need for sampling a large number of ballots to convince majority of people. On the contrary, a few of them were satisﬁed with the the sample size chosen for the audit and stated that the RLA is representing a fair sample of ballots to be audited. <title>5 Discussion and Conclusions</title> If we consider the quantitative and qualitative analysis in conjunction, a clearer picture emerges: despite the statistical soundness of the RLA method, human factors pose additional challenges to building public conﬁdence, which is one of the objectives of RLAs. In this section, we describe these challenges and oﬀer methods to respond to them. Sample sizes. The qualitative part of our study conﬁrmed the hypothesis that the voters’ expectation of how many ballots to audit exceeds the sample sizes computed by the RLA algorithm. We could also conﬁrm the hypothesis that when sharing information about the size of the sample with the voter, the sample-size aﬀects the voter’s perception of what is an appropriate number of ballots to audit. We conclude that small sample sizes can cause distrust. Two ways to respond to this challenge come to mind. First, by auditing more ballots than required one can better align the sample size more closely to the expectations of the voter, lowering the risk for creating distrust. Second, by structuring a national RLA into smaller RLAs to be executed on the jurisdiction or even precinct level, one implicitly increases the number of ballots to be audited. This is what happened for the 2020 US Presidential election, albeit not by choice but by law. Voter education. Our analysis also stresses the importance of voter education. Most voters are not familiar with the statistical theory behind RLAs and therefore it is not necessarily the case that an RLA is eﬀective in strengthening public conﬁdence in the election outcome. To raise the eﬀectiveness of RLAs for trustbuilding, targeted eﬀorts should be undertaken to educate the public on how to read and interpret the data that is the result of an RLA. Paper trail integrity. RLAs work under the assumption that the integrity of the paper trail is intact, which means that the paper trail is properly secured between vote casting and auditing. A few participants stated unprompted, how important the integrity of the paper trail actually is. We conclude that using hand-marked or even machine-marked paper ballots alone are not suﬃcient to strengthen public conﬁdence and trust in the election, but additional eﬀorts need to be undertaken to explain to the voter why the paper trail has integrity. External factors. We found that there are external factors that could strengthen the conﬁdence in the correct choice of the sample to be drawn, and these factors include academic research papers, experts, and consensus among the competing parties. We leave this as food for thought for election management bodies, who consider implementing RLAs as part of the election process. In future work, we propose to conduct additional user studies to investigate in more depth, the eﬀects of auditing votes on a jurisdictional or even precinct level on public conﬁdence, and the eﬀect full hand-counts have on public trust. Paradoxically, we speculate that voters will trust several smaller RLAs more then one big RLA on the national level. It would also be interesting to study the eﬀect of choosing larger sample size than the RLA-determined one to strengthen public conﬁdence in the election outcome. We realize of course, that this more a political science than a technical research question. Limitations: Due to our use of crowdsourcing for recruitment of the participants, our sample might be biased towards participants younger, better-educated and more likely to be active Internet users than the general population. While studies show that crowdfunding platforms can provide a sample representative of this demographic [9], future studies need to be performed to study the perception of RLAs among the rest of the population. We considered the ballot comparison method for RLAs, which is one of two methods commonly used in the US. Future studies will be needed to investigate whether the other method, which also results in auditing a larger sample of ballots, is more likely to create trust. In our study, we did not ask the participants about their prior knowledge about RLAs or attempted to educate them about the RLA procedure. While such investigations would be valuable point of future studies (e.g. in designing eﬀective voter education measures), our aim was to measure the conﬁdence in RLAs and how it is aﬀected by publishing the number of audited ballots among potential voters in the US as it is at this point of time, without extra interventions from our side. In our study we aimed to variate the number of sampled ballots (as a function of total number of cast ballots and margin), in order to study the participants’ attitudes given a variety of scenarios. Nonetheless, our variations still ended up in a relatively small interval of possible sample sizes. As such, very small margins 1%), that would result in a large amount of audited ballots, were seldom present and very large margins ( 20%) were not present at all. Future works will address this. Finally, we presented an abstract and hypothetical election scenario, whereby trust in election outcome is aﬀected by an overall context. Our ﬁndings however do show that the usage of RLAs alone is not enough to improve trust and might actually lower it. <title>6 Conclusion</title> We are not against RLAs. We do argue that as a measure to create trust, they are not suﬃcient by themselves, and additional measures such as voter education need to be considered. While this study is the ﬁrst one to investigate this issue, follow-up work is needed to better understand the factors inﬂuencing voter’s trust and the eﬀectiveness of various ways one can educate voters about RLAs or raise trust via other measures. <title>References</title>