the present study, we analyze experimental data from a merged-beams measurement to derive thermal rate coeﬃcients resolved by product channel for the temperature range from 10 to 1000 K. Published astrochemical models either ignore the second product channel or apply a temperature-independent branching ratio of 70% vs. 30% for the formation of OH originates from a single experimental data point measured at 295 K. Our results are consistent with this data point, but show a branching ratio that varies with temperature reaching 58% vs. 42% at 10 K. We provide recommended rate coeﬃcients for the two product channels for two cases, one where the initial ﬁne-structure population of the O(P) reactant is in its J = 2 ground state and the other one where it is in thermal equilibrium. Keywords: Interstellar molecules (849) — Molecular clouds (1072) — Collision processes (2065) — At the low temperatures typical of diﬀuse and dense molecular clouds (∼ 10 − 100 K), gas-phase formation of water is dominated by a sequence of exothermic ionneutral reactions (van Dishoeck et al. 2013). Two parallel formation pathways have been identiﬁed: One pathway proceeds via the reaction which is the focus of the present paper. The quoted energies represent the exoergicities of the reactions provided by Milligan & McEwan (2000). The other pathway proceeds via cosmic-ray ionization of O to Oor endothermic charge transfer with H, produced by cosmic ray ionization of H and H, and the subsequent reaction (Bulut et al. 2015; Kovalenko et al. 2018) Both pathways are followed by the reactions (Tran et al. 2018; Kumar et al. 2018) Dissociative recombination (DR) of electrons with HOthen leads to the formation of HO (Novotn´y et al. 2010). Two other important ingredients for an accurate gas-phase reaction network for forming water are the DR rate coeﬃcients leading to the destruction of OH(Amitay et al. 1996; Stroe & Fiﬁrig 2018) and HO(Ros´en et al. 2000; Nkambule et al. 2015). The various routes of interstellar water chemistry, including reactions (1)-(3), have been reviewed by van Dishoeck et al. (2013, 2021). The branching ratio for reaction (1b) is particularly important for describing the ortho-to-para ratio of water in interstellar clouds (Faure et al. 2019). Furthermore, the observed abundances of OH, HO, and HOare used to infer the cosmic-ray ionization rate (Hollenbach et al. 2012; Indriolo et al. 2015; Neufeld & Wolﬁre 2017; Indriolo et al. 2018). At temperatures of ∼ 250 K, endothermic neutral-neutral reactions such as O + H→ OH + H become accessible and dominate the gas-phase water formation process (van Dishoeck et al. 2021). This sets an upper limit for the temperature range of interest for reactions (1)-(3). In the present paper, we investigate the temperaturedependent thermal rate coeﬃcients and branching ratios for reactions (1a) and (1b). We derive our results from the merged-beams experiment performed by de Ruette et al. (2016). In their work, they derived the thermal rate coeﬃcient for the sum over both product channels, but not those resolved by product channel. We provide the relevant details of the experimental data set in Sec. 2. In Sec. 3 we present our results and compare them to the data available in the literature. Lastly, in Sec. 4 we discuss possible implications of our results on astrochemical models. In the merged-beams experiment of de Ruette et al. (2016), a beam of atomic oxygen was overlapped with a beam of Hat a well-deﬁned relative collision energy. The product ions, either OHor HO, were counted, normalized to the intensities of the two parent beams and the interaction volume, and corrected for transmittance and detection eﬃciencies. The particle densities in the interaction volume were low enough to exclude the formation of HOby sequential collisions. From the data, absolute cross sections as a function of the relative collision energy, E, were derived for each product channel individually. The range of Ewas 3.5 meV to 15.5 eV and 3.5 meV to 130 meV for the OHand HOproducts, respectively. At values of E higher than the ones investigated, the individual cross sections were smaller than the detection sensitivity of the experiment. The data for each product channel was parameterized by the ﬁt function Here, x = {OH, HO} refers to reactions (1a) and (1b), respectively, σis in units of cm, and Eis in eV. The ∼ Escaling in the limit of E→ 0 reﬂects the eﬀect of the long-range charge-quadrupole interaction between the Hion and the oxygen atom, as was discussed by Klippenstein et al. (2010). The ﬁt parameters are given in Tab. 1. The total uncertainty of the cross sections was given by the ﬁtting uncertainty and the relative systematic uncertainty of 13%, both summed in quadrature. Considering the astrochemical motivation of this study and the range of measured collision energies, we derived translational rate coeﬃcients, k(T ), in the Table 1. Parameters for σ(E) deﬁned in Eq. (4). ∗The values for this reaction were misprinted in de Ruette et al. (2016). temperature range of T = 10 − 1000 K by convoluting each cross section times the relative collision velocity, σ(E) × v, with a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The uncertainties of the rate coeﬃcients were propagated from the total uncertainties of the cross sections. Furthermore, we deﬁne the branching ratios, f(T ), as the relative yields, The uncertainty of f(T ) is solely aﬀected by statistical ﬂuctuations, while the systematic uncertainty cancels out. In the considered temperature range, the relative uncertainties of fand frange from 3 to 5% and 5 to 12%, respectively, while the absolute magnitude of the uncertainty is identical for both branching ratios. To understand the relation between k(T ) and the thermal rate coeﬃcient, k(T ), we will discuss the role of the internal excitation of the two reactants in Secs. 2.1 and 2.2, respectively. The merged-beams experiment of de Ruette et al. (2016) was performed with an internally excited H beam. Most of the possible inﬂuences of this internal excitation on the measured merged-beams rate coeﬃcient were discussed in their publication. In the experiment, the internal temperature of the Hions was estimated to be T≈ 2500 −3000 K. In Hillenbrand et al. (2019), we performed a more detailed analysis of the Hinternal temperature and its dependency on the Hpressure in the ion source. From these results we conﬁrmed that the Hpressure applied in the measurements of de Ruette et al. (2016) corresponds consistently to the previously estimated internal temperature. Here, we discuss an additional aspect of the Hinternal temperature that was not considered in de Ruette et al. (2016). For comparison, the exothermic reaction of C+ H→ CH+ H was studied in Hillenbrand et al. (2020). In that reaction, a low-lying endoergic reaction channel forming C+ H + H is energetically accessible at zero translational energy, provided that the internal excitation of the Hreactant is suﬃciently high. We found that this considerably reduced the measured mergedbeams rate coeﬃcient for all translational energies investigated. For the reaction studied here, the lowest endoergic channel is (de Ruette et al. 2016) We can estimate the fraction of Hions, whose internal energy is above this threshold, E> E= 1.77 eV, for a given internal temperature of Tby integrating the Boltzmann distribution over the internal energy, Based on the partition function provided by Kyl¨anp¨a¨a & Rantala (2011), T= 2500 and 3000 K correspond to mean internal energies of hEi = 0.64 and 0.86 eV, where 6% to 13% of the Hions have an internal energy above E, respectively. A part of this fraction can potentially form OH + H, even at the lowest measured translational energies. As a worst-case scenario, we can assume that all reactions of Hions with E> E do not contribute to reactions (1a) or (1b). This would mean that the cross sections and rate coeﬃcients reported by de Ruette et al. (2016) need to be scaled up by a factor 1.06 to 1.15. This scaling lies well within the total experimental uncertainty limits. Moreover, it affects both channels in the same direction and therefore does not aﬀect the branching ratios. In de Ruette et al. (2016), the atomic oxygen beam was generated through laser detachment of an oxygen anion beam (O’Connor et al. 2015b). The resulting oxygen atoms were in thePground term and the ﬁne structure levels were populated according to their multiplicity, with fractional populations being 5/9, 3/9, and 1/9 for J = 2, 1, and 0, respectively. This statistical population was veriﬁed at the few percent level in the experiment of G´en´evriez et al. (2018). For O(P), J = 2 represents the ground level, while the J = 1 and the J = 0 levels are excited by E= 19.6 meV and E= 28.1 meV, respectively (Lique et al. 2018). The three ﬁne-structure levels comprise a total of nine magnetic sublevels. As ﬁrst pointed out by Gentry & Giese (1977), only the three sublevels corresponding to J = 2 with M= ±1 or M= 0 correlate to the reactiveΣ potential energy surface (PES). The other six sublevels all correlate with the nonreactiveΠ PES (Gentry & Giese 1977; Bettens et al. 1999; Klippenstein et al. 2010). Since both product channels only proceed on theΣ PES, the branching ratio of the product channels is independent of the initial ﬁne-structure population. This aspect was overlooked by de Ruette et al. (2016) and prevented them from deriving thermal rate coeﬃcients for the individual product channels. Two astrochemical scenarios for the ﬁne-structure level population may be of interest: Either only the J = 2 ground level is populated or the ﬁne-structure level populations are in thermal equilibrium. Which of the two cases is applicable actually depends on the particle density. According to Lique et al. (2018), atomic oxygen is thermalized only at H or Hdensities on the order of 10− 10cm. The conversion of the measured translational rate coeﬃcients into thermal rate coeﬃcients assuming a statistical population of the ﬁne-structure levels in the merged-beams experiment and a thermal population in the astrochemical environment is (de Ruette et al. 2016) k(T ) = k Here, kis the Boltzmann constant. For the scenario of a pure O(P) reactant, the relation reduces to k(T ) = k(T )×9/5. As discussed above, the rate coeﬃcients for O(P) and O(P) reactants are zero for both scenarios. 3. THERMAL RATE COEFFICIENT 3.1. Summed over both product channels The thermal rate coeﬃcient summed over both product channels, assuming a thermal population of the OPﬁne-structure levels, has been discussed in detail by de Ruette et al. (2016). The temperature dependency of the thermal rate coeﬃcient is mainly formed by the eﬀect of the long-range charge-quadrupole interaction [see Eq. (4)], and the eﬀect of the ﬁne-structure population [see Eq. (8)]. The results were compared to two published experimental data points, both measured at room temperature: Fehsenfeld (1976) used a Figure 1. Thermal rate coeﬃcient for the OH+ Hchannel (upper bold data) and the HO+ H channel (lower ﬁne data). Shown are: our results by the red solid lines, with the gray area indicating the total experimental uncertainty at one standard deviation; the results of Milligan & McEwan (2000) by the circular data points (shifted slightly in temperature for clarity); and the data implemented in the astrochemical models listed in Sec. 3.2 by the green dashed lines. ﬂowing afterglow technique to measure the thermal rate coeﬃcient summed over both product channels, and Milligan & McEwan (2000) applied a combined ﬂowing afterglow/selected ﬂow tube technique to measure thermal rate coeﬃcients resolved by product channel. Both methods are such that the translational temperature and the internal temperature of both reactants were in thermal equilibrium. The results of de Ruette et al. (2016) were in good agreement with the measurement of Fehsenfeld (1976) and in reasonable agreement with the measurements of Milligan & McEwan (2000). Furthermore, the theoretical rate coeﬃcients of Bettens et al. (1999) and Klippenstein et al. (2010) had the same temperature dependency as the result of de Ruette et al. (2016), but were overall a factor of about 1.5 higher. Following the discussion of Sec. 2.1 it is unlikely that such a discrepancy was caused by the internal excitation of the Hbeam in the experiment. The thermal rate coeﬃcient resolved by product channel, derived from the data of de Ruette et al. (2016), are shown in Fig. 1. Considering the mutual uncertainties, they agree reasonably well with the measurement of Milligan & McEwan (2000) at 295 K. Astrochemical models such as UMIST (McElroy et al. 2013), KIDA (Wakelam et al. 2015), and UGAN (Hily-Blant et al. 2018) implemented channel resolved rate coeﬃcients using the total reaction rate coeﬃcient of Klippenstein et al. (2010), the branching ratio from Milligan & McEwan (2000), Figure 2. Branching ratio expressed as relative yield for the two product channels. Shown are: our results by the red solid line, with the gray area indicating the total experimental uncertainty at one standard deviation; the results of Milligan & McEwan (2000) by the circular data point; the results of Bettens et al. (1999) by the blue dotted line; and the ratio implemented in the astrochemical models listed in Sec. 3.2 by the green dashed line. and assumed the ratio to be temperature-independent. Our results are generally lower than the rates implemented in the models. Of particular note is the factor 1.7 diﬀerence at 10 K for the OH+ Hchannel. The branching ratio deﬁned in Eq. (5) is plotted in Fig. 2. For the HO+ H product channel the branching ratio derived from our results ranges from (42 ±3)% at 10 K down to (22±3)% at 1000 K. At 295 K, our result of (33±2)% is consistent with the value of (30±9)% measured by Milligan & McEwan (2000). Up to now, those astrochemical models that considered the branching ratio assumed it to be 30% independent of the temperature, based on the measurement of Milligan & McEwan (2000). The branching ratio calculated by Bettens et al. (1999) was (5.6±1.6)% for the HO+H product channel, and thus does not agree at all with either set of experimental results. For the analog reaction of C + H, we found a similar discrepancy between our experimental results in O’Connor et al. (2015a) and the theoretical results of Bettens & Collins (1998, 2001). These ﬁndings may suggest a shortcoming of the classical trajectory simulations and the PES used. The good agreement for the branching ratio for O + Hfrom the experimental results of Milligan & McEwan (2000) and our results in de Ruette et al. (2016), which used two diﬀerent experimental methods with diﬀering systematics, and for C + Hfrom Savi´c et al. (2005) and ours in O’Connor et al. (2015a), which also used two diﬀerent experimen- Table 2. Recommended thermal rate coeﬃcients for O + H, given as parameters of Eq. (9) for T = 10 − 1000 K. J thermalOH+ HHO tal methods with diﬀering systematics, suggest that the discrepancy is not an experimental issue. We used the Arrhenius-Kooij formula, to parameterize our results for the two product channels in the temperature range of 10 to 1000 K for implementation into astrochemical models. The ﬁt parameters, α, β, and γ, are shown in Tab. 2 for the two cases of the O(P) level population discussed in Sec. 2.2 and the two product channels. The ﬁts describe our results to better than 5% for reaction (1a) and to better than 10% for reaction (1b). Resolved by the nuclear-spin states, reactions (1a) and (1b) read and where p- signiﬁes para and o- signiﬁes ortho. In reactions (10) and (11), the numbers given in squared brackets represent the statistical factors resulting from the nuclear-spin selection rules (Oka 2004). In nuclear-spin state resolved astrochemical networks, the rate coeﬃcients are typically scaled by multiplying the parameters α with the statistical factor while the parameters β and γ are considered to be independent of the spin states (Majumdar et al. 2017; Hily-Blant et al. 2018). This approach is justiﬁed for reactions where the exoergicity does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly between diﬀerent spin-resolved product channels. The same approach can be applied to our results given in Tab. 2 and the resulting nuclear-spin-resolved rate coeﬃcients can be implemented into models studying the ortho-to-para ratio of gas-phase formed water (Faure et al. 2019). In de Ruette et al. (2016), the derived thermal rate coeﬃcient summed over both product channels was implemented into the KIDA model (Wakelam et al. 2015), and potential implications were studied for the predicted abundances of HO, HO, and other molecules downstream the reaction chain. Here, we brieﬂy discuss the relevance of the O + Hbranching ratio along the following simpliﬁed reaction chain: O−→OH+ H−→ O + H + H(12) For typical astrochemical environments, the Hdensity is high enough such that the HOformation through the intermediate step of OHformation proceeds with an eﬀective rate coeﬃcient comparable to the direct formation pathway. In this case, including the branching ratio decreases the predicted OHabundance, but not the HOabundance nor subsequent products along the reaction chain, such as HOand, prominently, HO. However, in those scenarios where the destruction of OHby DR plays a signiﬁcant role, direct formation of HOpresents a bypass with respect to the OHdestruction by DR, and thus may enhance the abundance of HOand its subsequent reaction products. Based on the experimental data of de Ruette et al. (2016), we have derived temperature-dependent thermal rate coeﬃcients for reactions (1a) and (1b). The experimental data were measured with internally excited H reactants, but we ﬁnd that this has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the derived rate coeﬃcients. Up to now, the general understanding for the branching ratio of these reactions relied solely on the ﬁxed temperature measurement of Milligan & McEwan (2000) at 295 K. At that temperature, we found a branching ratio that is consistent with the one implemented in commonly used astrochemical models, but we ﬁnd an enhanced yield for the HO+H product channel towards lower temperatures. Our results underline the importance of including both product channels into reliable models. This research was supported, in part, by the NSF Division of Astronomical Sciences Astronomy and Astrophysics Grants program under AST-2002461. X. U. is a Senior Research Associate of the Fonds de la Recherche Scientiﬁque-FNRS.