This paper proposes a Bayesian method to analyze data from ﬁrst-price (sealed-bid) procurements (FPP) with bidder-asymmetry in cost and risk-aversion. In particular, we consider a theoretical model of FPP with exogenous entry and type-symmetric Bayesian Nash Equilibrium bidding strategies. Here, a type of bidder refers to a pair of cost density and constant relative risk-aversion (CRRA) coeﬃcient. For this setting, Campo (2012) identiﬁes the model primitive (cost densities and CRRA coeﬃcients) and proposes an indirect semiparametric estimation method. The empirical literature, however, has seldom considered asymmetry in both cost and risk-aversion. We, therefore, have limited empirical insights on the eﬀects of asymmetric risk-aversion on procurement outcomes. duces reliable inference for asymmetric FPPs by combining and extending several state-ofthe-art methods in the literature. First, the procedure explores the posterior distribution over the space of the model primitive by a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm (Kim, 2015). Second, we model the (procurement-speciﬁc) unobserved heterogeneity as additional latent components that are distributed jointly with the model primitive under the posterior so that we can integrate out the latent components via MCMC. This strategy to get around the diﬃculty of handling missing variables is known as data augmentation, which Li and Zheng (2009) and Aryal, Grundl, Kim, and Zhu (2018), among others, use to study auction markets. Third, we extend the boundary-value method of Fibich and Gavish (2011) to compute the type-symmetric equilibrium strategies for risk-averse bidders in FPPs and use it in our MCMC algorithm. Note that the literature has often used the backward-shooting method of Marshall, Meurer, Richard, and Stromquist (1994) to compute asymmetric bidding strategies, which is, however, shown to be inherently unstable near the boundary of the support; see Fibich and Gavish (2011). The boundary-value method is reliable everywhere and, therefore, is more suitable for evaluating likelihoods and conducting policy simulations. The main contribution of this paper is to develop a novel empirical procedure that pro- In addition, our Bayesian method provides a natural framework for formal decisionmaking under parameter uncertainty. In particular, we consider the policymaker who wishes to choose a reserve price to minimize the (expected) procurement cost when there is uncertainty about the model primitives. Our decision method computes the procurement cost under a model primitive at a given (type-speciﬁc) reserve price. For this step, we further extend the algorithm of Fibich and Gavish (2011) to accommodate binding reserve prices and evaluate the procurement cost by simulating equilibrium bids. The decision method then integrates out the model primitive by the posterior, resulting in the (posterior) predictive procurement cost at the said reserve price. Finally, our method selects a reserve price that gives the smallest predictive cost. (1954) and Anscombe and Aumann (1963). See also Kim (2013), Aryal and Kim (2013), and Aryal, Grundl, Kim, and Zhu (2018) for applications of statistical decision theory in empirical auction design problems. This paper is the ﬁrst to conduct such detailed counterfactual simulations for FPPs with asymmetric costs and risk-aversion. curements conducted in 2014. (Charankevich (2021) investigates a sample of “open auctions” in the Russian procurements, which is diﬀerent from the sample of FPPs that we analyze here.) In Russia, all government units purchase a wide range of goods and services through public procurements, which accounts for 7% of Russian GDP in 2014. Since the economic transition beginning in the 1990s, Russia has been revising the procurement system through several legislative changes and technological innovations to establish transparent competition among the suppliers to reduce the government expenditure. It is, therefore, critical for the policymaker to learn the economic fundamentals of the procurement system and evaluate alternative policy options for further improvements. We illustrate how our method can help the policymaker achieve the goals using the data. them, e.g., FPP or “open auctions,” depending on the nature of the project and according This solution is also coherent under the rationality axioms for a decision-maker in Savage Using our empirical method, we study a new dataset with FPPs from Russian public pro- The Russian procurement system practices several allocation methods and selects one of to the relevant federal laws. For example, small projects (reserve price below RUB 500,000) must use an FPP. In total, there are 102 diﬀerent categories in FPPs based on diﬀerent goods and services. The categories are separate, each with its own market and a diﬀerent set of suppliers. We choose one category to analyze by applying a set of selection criteria mostly concerning the sample size. We divide bidders into three types: type 1 (frequent) bidders bid in at least 10% of the procurements and type 3 (fringe) bidders only once, and type 2 are the remainders. Among the four categories complying with our selection criteria, we choose to analyze the category of “printing papers,” as it has the largest sample with 411 procurements. In the “printing papers” category, 1, 171, and 402 unique bidders are of types 1, 2, and 3, and we observe a total of 58, 625, and 402 bids, respectively. diﬀerence in bids may arise because of diﬀerences in costs or risk-aversion. The posterior of the model parameters (model primitive) reveals that the ordering of risk-aversion is the opposite of the observed bid pattern. In particular, the CRRA coeﬃcient of type 1 (frequent) bidder is roughly 0.2, whereas the coeﬃcients of type 2 and 3 bidders are respectively 0.8 and 0.9. But, the predictive cost densities suggest that type 1 bidder tends to draw smaller costs than type 2, and type 2 smaller than type 3. Therefore, the diﬀerence between the cost densities is substantial enough to explain the bid pattern, despite the reversely ordered risk-aversion. Our analysis also ﬁnds no variation in the unobserved heterogeneity, which is consistent with the job of supplying papers being routine. tual policy analysis. All bidders, except the most frequent bidder, exhibit high risk-aversion. So, the policymaker should prefer FPP to second-price procurements (SPP) (Holt, 1980) and choose a large reserve price in an FPP (Hu, Matthews, and Zou, 2010). In particular, we ﬁnd that when a single reserve price is used for all bidders, the current mechanism is cost-minimizing. Recall also that when bidders are asymmetric, choosing a single reserve price would be suboptimal. Although there is no closed-form expression for the reserve prices On average, type 1 bidder bids lower than type 2, and type 2 lower than type 3. The Our estimates of the model parameters are coherent with our ﬁndings in the counterfacas in Myerson (1981) due to risk-aversion, our method allows evaluating the procurement costs at diﬀerent type-speciﬁc reserve prices. It recommends lowering the reserve price for type 1 by 4% from the current reserve price, but leaving other types’ prices unchanged. In that case, however, our method predicts a cost reduction only of 0.2%, suggesting that the current mechanism is eﬀectively cost-minimizing. in the spirit of Bulow and Klemperer (1996). For symmetric FPPs, the article implies that an FPP without a reserve price generates lower expected costs than optimally chosen reserve price but with one less bidder. We ﬁnd that this insight holds in our context with bidders who are asymmetric in both cost densities and risk-aversion. In particular, adding one bidder of type 1, 2, and 3 reduces the predictive procurement cost by 6.2%, 5.8%, and 5.5%, respectively. Thus, even one additional fringe bidder substantially lowers the cost. rectly assuming either risk neutrality or an identical CRRA parameter for all bidders. When one ignores risk-aversion, small bids in the data inﬂate the left tail of the cost densities, which then tilts cost-minimizing reserve prices toward zero. As a result, the misspeciﬁed model selects a small reserve price, predicting 14.0% of cost-reduction. But, this result is misleading because the model with asymmetric CRRAs predicts a 15.2% of increase in the cost at that price. The misspeciﬁed model predicts that the eﬃcient bidder wins with 33.2% of probability, whereas the model with asymmetric CRRAs predicts that the probability would be 6.0%. We ﬁnd that the model with a common CRRA overall approximates our analysis with asymmetric CRRAs, except for overestimating type 1 bidder’s CRRA coeﬃcient. approximates the model with asymmetric risk-aversion because the approximation quality may depend on the model primitive, a priori unknown to the researcher. Our method with asymmetric CRRAs is not computationally more expensive than the model with a common CRRA. Therefore, there is no reason to impose homogeneity in CRRA coeﬃcients. Finally, In addition, we consider a scenario where the policymaker may invite an additional bidder Moreover, we investigate the implications on the procurement cost and eﬃciency of incor- Nevertheless, one should not conclude that the model with identical risk-aversion always our analysis is robust to alternative deﬁnitions of bidder types, the prior over the parameter that indexes the cost densities, and the density speciﬁcation of unobserved heterogeneity. tions 3 and 4 present our data and econometric method, respectively. Section 5 discusses the empirical results and counterfactual analysis. Section 6 concludes with feasible extensions. The detailed information about data, computational detail, and additional results are in Supplementary Appendix (Aryal, Charankevich, Jeong, and Kim, 2021a). Consider a procurement that allocates a project to one of the bidders in the set I with |I| ≥ 2. Bidders submit their bids simultaneously, and the one with the lowest bid wins the project at a price equal to her bid, which we refer to as the ﬁrst-price procurement (FPP). Let bidder i’s cost be c bidders’ costs. We make the following assumptions on the cost distributions. Assumption 2. Bidder i’s utility function is given by U with the parameter η auction literature, e.g., Bajari and Horta¸csu (2005), Lu and Perrigne (2008), Campo, Guerre, Perrigne, and Vuong (2011), and Aryal, Grundl, Kim, and Zhu (2018). Such convenience also allows the boundary-value method of Fibich and Gavish (2011) to accommodate bidderspeciﬁc risk-aversion in this paper, and one may compare the coeﬃcients with previous estimates due to its prevalence. The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our model and its identiﬁcation. Sec- , and for two diﬀerent bidders i 6= j it can be that F(c) 6= F(c) for some c. In addition, bidder i exhibits constant relative risk-aversion (CRRA) with coeﬃcient, η. The CRRA speciﬁcation has been widely used due to its convenient functional form in the 2. While the realizations of costs are bidders’ private information, cost distributions and risk-aversion parameters, {F with cost c Suppose all bidders other than bidder i use strictly increasing equilibrium bidding strategies Deﬁne φ bmust satisfy the condition, for all i ∈ I, implying a system of diﬀerential equations, which can be numerically solved with the boundary conditions φ shooting, starts with a guess of b Richard, and Stromquist, 1994). Fibich and Gavish (2011), however, show that the backwardshooting algorithm is inherently unstable near the boundary and propose the boundary-value method to overcome the problem. We use their boundary-value method in our empirical method, where {φ boundary. I to identify the parameters of interest. For completeness, we present the core intuition of the identiﬁcation strategy in Campo (2012). Since {φ If bidder i wins the procurement at price b, her utility is (b−c)under Assumption (b|I) := β(b|I), the inverse bidding strategy of bidder j. Then, the optimal bid Since b= β(c|I) is unknown, the standard algorithm to solve (1), known as backwardbid distribution of bidder i ∈ I is G where g which gives g is suﬃcient for identiﬁcation. For example, if we observe FPPs with I and I where the right-hand side depends only on the bid densities that are directly identiﬁed from the data. Then, by substituting η Unobserved Heterogeneity. Bidders may observe some aspects of the project that aﬀect their costs (and hence their bids), which the researcher does not observe. Let u ∈ R such unobserved characteristics. (·|I) is the density of G(·|I). Note that (2) in a procurement with I = {1, 2} gives = {2, 3}, we identify the CRRA coeﬃcients as location normalization, e.g., u is known. Let Fbe the distribution of cfor bidder i ∈ I and {β: i ∈ I} be the associated bidding strategies with the unobserved heterogeneity, u are multiplicatively separable in u Lemma 1. In equilibrium, for c β(c|I) is bidder i’s equilibrium bidding strategy when u with CRRA utilities. This result follows from the application of Proposition 1 in Krasnokutskaya (2011) to the unique equilibrium bidding strategies {β exists unique {β and Vuong (1998) and Krasnokutskaya (2011). We formalize this result below; see its proof in section S2 of the Supplemental Appendix (S for the appendix, hereafter). Lemma 2. Under Assumptions 1–3, {F submitted bids {(b the procurement with a strictly positive probability (so, I This section describes the institutional background of the government procurements in Russia, presents the dataset we analyze, and discusses the implications of the reserve price on our analysis in sections 4 and 5. In particular, the background description here identiﬁes a few cases where observed bids might not be competitive and justiﬁes the data we study as equilibrium outcomes after excluding those suspicious cases. It also motivates us to take cost-minimization as the primary policy objective in counterfactual analysis. All government bodies and public units in Russia purchase goods and services through government procurements: examples of potential buyers include federal public authorities, This lemma extends Proposition 1 in Krasnokutskaya (2011) to include risk-averse bidders ). The identiﬁcation argument combines Campo (2012) with Kotlarski (1966) as in Li regional governments, city councils, public hospitals, and schools. Hundreds of goods and services, e.g., car tires, hardcover textbooks, road maintenance, and printing papers, are traded via the oﬃcial platform, “Uniﬁed Information System (UIS: zakupki.gov.ru).” (We use quotation marks to indicate ﬁeld terms in their closest English translation. Moreover, procurement here is a general term referring to procuring something unless it comes with a technical qualiﬁer, e.g., ﬁrst-price procurement.) The public procurements are economically signiﬁcant; according to the UIS, concluded contracts in 2014 add up to 5.47 trillion RUB (≈7% of Russian GDP, statistical.com). curement system through several changes in legislation and modernizing it via technical innovations. Those reforms aim to reduce government spending and improve outcomes by creating a competitive environment for suppliers; especially by encouraging suppliers’ participation as well as eliminating corruption between government agents and suppliers. In particular, Federal Law No. 94-FZ (21 July 2005) laid a foundation for the current form of the system. The Law introduced the concept of “maximum (or initial contract) prices” and prohibited “closed procurements,” i.e., a negotiation inviting a single supplier, except for special cases such as projects involving state secrets. supplier and set a price. Therefore, the agent (buyer) could set a high price and select an “insider” (a supplier in collusion) to carry out the project at a cost lower than the price and share the margin. The legislation mandates that a “maximum price” must be chosen in such a way that participation of general suppliers is encouraged for “healthy competition,” and the price can still be justiﬁable given the nature of the project, market conditions, and historical data. For example, a buyer should be able to purchase comparable goods and services at the “maximum price” outside the procurement system. (The UIS provides protocols and oﬃcial methods for setting a “maximum price” to handle diﬀerent situations.) Section 3.3 below discusses the implications of “maximum price” for our analysis. Since the economic transition beginning in the 1990s, Russia has been revising the pro- Before the Law (94-FZ), the government agent had considerable freedom to choose a select a supplier through a competitive procedure. The “maximum price” is then publicly announced, and any legal entity can participate with no entrance fee. The announcement should be placed at least four business days before the closing date if the “maximum price” is below RUB 250,000 (and seven days if above) to prevent buyers from selecting an “insider” by setting a tight deadline. the UIS publicly announces forthcoming procurements and maintains all procurement data, e.g., participants’ identities, their oﬀers, and the winner for every procurement, and the UIS provides a platform to run a procurement. The system practices several allocation methods, including negotiation and contest, and one of them is “sealed-bid auction” in the ﬁeld term. When the latter is implemented, bidders submit their initial documents in a sealed envelope (or online, but rarely in 2014). In the presence of all participants, then, each bidder makes a ﬁnal decision on her bid and, ﬁnally, the procurer opens all the bids (Federal Law No. 44-FZ, article 78 of paragraph 3). Note that the procurer, here, is a government agency running procurements on behalf of buyers, other government agents. The lowest bidder wins at a price equal to her bid, if not higher than the “maximum price.” The mechanism is, therefore, the ﬁrst-price procurement (FPP), where bidders know whom they oppose, and the “maximum price” plays the role of a reserve price in FPPs. But, the penalty for a supplier in corruption, e.g., “insider,” is RUB 500,000 plus a full reimbursement of expenses. The supplier is also publicly marked as “unreliable” for two years. In addition, the ﬁne for the government agent in corruption is RUB50,000 with a three-year suspension from the job. only. For example, a buyer could deliberately make a typographical error, e.g., replacing a Cyrillic letter with a similar Latin letter in keywords. Then, only the insider can easily For projects with a “maximum price” above RUB 100,000 (≈$2,600), the procurer must In addition, to improve transparency, by Federal Law No. 44-FZ (1 January 2014), FPPs are used for cases with a “maximum price” below RUB 500,000, i.e., small projects. Despite all the legal devices to eliminate corruption, a buyer can still invite an “insider” search for it in the system. Therefore, the cases with only one bidder can be suspicious. Even when multiple bidders appear in a procurement, there can be corruption. For example, the agent could invite shill bidders who submit bids with no chance of winning, e.g., bidding higher than the reserve price. Alternatively, the agent may manipulate submitted bids to increase the winning probability of the insider. Charankevich (2021) reports evidence of bid manipulation by exploring procurement outcomes and non-reported (or missing) bids in “open auctions,” which can be viewed as an oral-descending procurement. Considering all these, in our analysis, we exclude observations with only one bidder, bids above reserve prices, or missing bids to avoid those suspicious cases. The procurements with FPPs provide an ideal setting to study asymmetry in both cost densities and risk-aversion for the following reasons. First, bid data from FPPs allow us to identify the risk-aversion parameters, unlike data from “open auctions.” Second, FPPs are less prone to collusion among the bidders than oral-descending procurements because bidders do not observe other bidders’ behavior (Robinson, 1985). Third, since FPPs are used for projects with small budgets, they may attract small ﬁrms that are likely to be risk-averse (Herranz, Krasa, and Villamil, 2015). Finally, projects with small budgets are homogeneous and frequently conducted, i.e., the bid preparation cost would be minimal, and the jobs are routine. For this reason, the procurement-speciﬁc unobserved heterogeneity might not be substantial, which section 5 shall conﬁrm from the data. and services; see section S3.1 for the list of the categories and some statistics. We consider each category as an independent set of procurements because they are separated by industries with diﬀerent sets of suppliers. category, ﬁrst, we rule out all procurements with one bidder because they are vulnerable to The UIS provides data on 42,828 FPPs in 2014 across 102 categories of diﬀerent goods Now, we explain how we select a category to analyze; see also section S3.1. In each corruption (section 3.1) and are not even bidding competition. We then exclude procurements with missing bids, which may arise due to bid manipulation (Charankevich, 2021). We also discard the procurements with bids larger than reserve prices because those bids could be shill bids as discussed or could signal that the reserve prices are set too low, violating the UIS protocols to select a reserve price. In both cases, the bids are not generated from the equilibrium we assume. each category, type 1 bidders bid in at least ten percent of the FPPs, type 3 bidders bid once, and type 2 bidders are all the others. We deﬁne the bidder types by the participation rate because it is the only exogenous bidder-speciﬁc attribute other than their identities. (Section 5.3 considers alternative deﬁnitions.) Since the identiﬁcation strategy relies on the variation in the bid for each type and bidder conﬁguration, we sort out categories with at least 50 bids for each type to estimate the type-speciﬁc parameters. Four categories satisfy this condition. Among them, we analyze the one with the largest sample, which is the category of “printing papers” with T = 411 procurements. (In the previous version of this paper, Aryal, Charankevich, Jeong, and Kim (2020) study the four categories separately, where the other ones have 228, 235, and 305 procurements.) A typical order speciﬁes A4 white papers in packs of 500 sheets. The paper can vary from “regular white” of 92-94% (ISO) to “premium white” above 98% (ISO). A standard contract includes the delivery term that can range from 5 to 30 days and provision for the fulﬁllment of incomplete orders and replacement or exchange of damaged goods within 3 to 10 days after delivery. As mentioned above, any government unit can purchase the products, and any legal entity that can supply papers may bid in this category. category. This category initially has 536 FPPs. Among them, we exclude 114 for having only one bid, three for missing bids, and eight for bids above the reserve price. Among the After excluding the three cases as mentioned above, we group bidders by three types: in The category “printing papers” refers to white A4 paper for printing, copying, and faxing. Now, we document some descriptive statistics of the data from the “printing papers” eight bids, ﬁve (three) were submitted by bidders who bid once (twice). No bidder repeats bidding above the reserve price, and no one wins with such a bid. In the sample of 411 (= 536 − (114 + 3 + 8)) procurements, we have one type 1 bidder who bids 58 times, 171 type 2 bidders with 625 bids, and 402 type 3 bidders. The second and third frequent bidders appear 33 and 14 times in the data. To see how the type deﬁnition aﬀects our analysis, in section 5.3 we change the deﬁnition of type 1 to include second frequent bidder and then to also include the third frequent bidder. The entrance rate dramatically drops only for the ﬁrst a few bidders; see Figure 1(a), suggesting that those frequent bidders may be diﬀerent from other bidders, i.e., asymmetry in model primitives. 474 bids and (25, 260, 189) of them, i.e., (5, 55, 40)%, are submitted by type (1, 2, 3) bidders, respectively. The sample mean and standard deviation of the bids are 0.93 and 0.08. Panels (c)∼(f) similarly show the bid data for procurements with 3 to 6 bidders. bidders appear to use the information on the competition. The bid distributions vary with the number of bidders, and there is a tendency that the average bid decreases in the number of bidders. We conduct the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test against the hypothesis that two marginal bid distributions are identical. The p values are close to zero for all pairs involving the two bidder case (b) and for the pair of three bidder case (c) and four bidder case (d), rejecting the hypothesis of identical distributions. That is, we have some evidence that bidders appear to behave diﬀerently according to the competition level; section S3.2 gives more evidence. As the number of bidders grows, however, the bid distributions get harder to distinguish statistically. That might be because the bid weakly converges to the cost with the competition level. The number of bidders also gets noisier in measuring the competition because the bidder conﬁguration becomes more variable when bidders are symmetric. (g)∼(i)). (For any pair of two types, the p-value of the KS test is close to zero.) This pattern Figure 1(b) shows the histogram of bids from procurements with two bidders. It has Recall that bidders know whom they oppose when bidding; see section 3.1. In the data, On average, type 3 bidders bid higher than type 2 and type 2 higher than type 1 (panels arises if type τ is either more eﬃcient or more risk-averse than type τ + 1. But, the cause of the pattern cannot be detected by reduced form analysis, motivating a structural approach. the upper (lower) panels. Note that there is no symmetric procurements with type 1 bidder, as there is one type 1 bidder. The left and middle panels are for 2 and 3 bidder procurements and the right ones for the rest in the data. As discussed there, we conduct the KS test and get additional evidence that bidders’ behavior depends on the competition level, especially for the cases with suﬃciently large bid samples; see also section S3.2. Figure 2 shows the bid histograms for symmetric procurements with type 2 (3) bidders in Although we have excluded the procurements with bids above reserve prices, the high density near the reserve price may still seemingly suggest the presence of shill bids (no winning chance). According to the data, however, the bid of 0.99 gives a 14% chance of winning. Hence, the high density does not indicate shill bids. It is, instead, plausible that bidders’ optimal bids are actually near the reserve price because the reserve price has to be justiﬁable as a market price as discussed in section 3.1; see also section 3.3. to submit noncompetitive bids. Empirical methods to detect a bidding ring require bidders to be risk-neutral and a suspicious group of bidders to bid together in many procurements; see Schurter (2020) and references therein. It is infeasible to study a bidding ring using our data Finally, a group of suppliers may collude (not necessarily involving the government agent) because even if the currently available methods may extend for risk-aversion, the dropping entrance rate in Figure 1(a) does not leave us any group of bidders jointly appearing in suﬃciently many procurements. In particular, among 45 pairs of top ten frequent bidders, only eight have ever bid in the same procurements, but rarely: type 1 bidder met the (2, 4, 6, 7, 9) met twice, the 3 Recall that the reserve price is set suﬃciently high to encourage suppliers’ participation and yet still justiﬁable as a market price to purchase comparable goods and services outside the procurement system. This description has three important implications on our analysis in the following sections. First, the procurement system does not use the reserve price to deter any bidder from entering, which alone might validate the reserve price as non-binding. Second, the description of the reserve price also implies that if a supplier incurred a cost higher than the reserve price, the cost is too high for the supplier to operate in the market, even outside the procurements. Hence, we do not consider such an ineﬃcient supplier as a potential bidder in the procurement, and section 4 speciﬁes the cost densities to have their support below the current reserve price, i.e., the latter is nonbinding. Third, in our policy simulations, when no bidder can bid below the counterfactual reserve price, we assume that the procurer carries out the job at the current reserve price; see section 5.2. A set I t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Bidder i ∈ I draws her cost c other bidders. The cost density is strictly positive on [0, 1], corresponding to the bid data of bidders who can beat the reserve price is exogenously given for each procurement normalized by the reserve price. Let f := {f and θ := (f, η). Let β bidder i observes her cost u in [u u≤ 1 reﬂects the institutional feature that the reserve price does not exclude any bidder. where ψ Legendre polynomials, deﬁned on [0, 1]. Speciﬁcally, the j-th entry in φ(·) is given as φ 2j + 1 × with the small weight (0.01) ensures that the density is always strictly bounded away from zero. increases, the the density of f i.e., the ones with many inﬂection points. Believing that the true cost densities are smooth, we put a smaller prior probability on larger j by the prior π gets close to zero as j increases, squeezing out the contribution of higher order components. Hence, cost densities with oscillations are less likely under our prior. Note that (3) is the uniform at the prior mean. where the lower bound u(σ (c|θ, I) ∈ [b(θ, I), 1], where b(θ, I) := β(0|θ, I) for all i ∈ I. When u6= 1, b(θ, I), u]. We model u, . . . , u∼ f(·) with the support of [u, 1] and u > 0. Note that For estimation, we specify the cost density as f(c) := f(c|ψ) :=0.01 + 0.99 ×R Note that φhas j − 1 extrema; see section S4 for graphs of φ(·) for some js. As k ∼ N(0, (2)) for all j ∈ {1, . . . , k}. Since the prior variance of ψdecreases in j, ψ For the unobserved heterogeneity, we specify f(·) such that it implies the upper bound is set to 1 because the reserve price is non-binding, larger than the upper bound of the cost. To ensure that u This restriction implies the upper bound of σ the uniform prior π fail due to the ﬂat utility function, i.e., u(x) = x π(θ, σ for which we need to evaluate β method to accommodate bidders with CRRA utility in FPPs, which Fibich and Gavish (2011) originally propose for risk-neutral bidders in high-bid auctions. where z := ((b we have the posterior of the structural parameter θ, we are mostly interested in the posterior moments of important functions of θ. For a measurable function h(θ), its r moment is E[h(θ) along with some uncertainty notions such as the posterior standard deviation, for which r = 2 is also used. To evaluate the moments we ﬁrst draws θ standard Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm; see section S6. Then, we evaluate the moments by the MCMC draws, i.e., M our method using artiﬁcial data. We consider three types of bidders, each with a diﬀerent cost ) ∝ (0, 0.9), which excludes values near 1 to ensure that our computation does not ) :=π(ψ)π(σ)π(η), where θ := {θ}with θ:= (ψ, η) and τ = 3. Conditional on (u, θ), the bid bin procurement t has the density g(b|u, θ, I) :=×× (b/u∈ [b(θ, I Then, the posterior density of the latent variables is given as We conclude this section with a summary of section S7 that evaluates the performance of density and CRRA parameter, in FPPs with a substantial variation of bidder conﬁgurations: A ∈ {(11), (111), (22), (222), (33), (333), (12), (13), (23), (123)}. We consider two cases: one with a substantial variation in the unobserved heterogeneity, σ variation σ all As. Using those bid data we ﬁnd that the MCMC traces are stable and converge quickly, and parameters are accurately estimated. As desired, the posterior of quantities of interests, such as f or σ This section ﬁrst summarizes the posterior distribution of structural parameters with the model with asymmetric risk-aversion, and discusses the bias from misspeciﬁcation of the model: imposing symmetric risk-aversion or ignoring risk-aversion altogether. Then, the section predicts procurement costs under counterfactual scenarios, and also quantiﬁes the impacts of model misspeciﬁcation in terms of procurement costs. Finally, the section concludes with some sensitivity analysis. Asymmetric Risk-Aversion. We sample (θ, σ cussed in section 3, allowing for bidder asymmetry in cost density and risk-aversion. The top block of Table 1 shows the posterior mean, standard deviation, and a 95% credible interval (2.5 and 97.5 percentiles) for each CRRA coeﬃcient η frequent) bidder is the least risk-averse, and type 3 (one-time) bidders are the most riskaverse. The posterior of η than the ones of η (·|θ) and f(·|σ), becomes more precise around the true values, whether σ> 0 = 0, as the sample size increases. The estimates suggest that risk-aversion varies across the three types. Type 1 (most the latter is more precise and (slightly) larger. Formally, the p values of KS test are all close to zero, rejecting the hypothesis that η distributions for τ 6= ˜τ. supplying A4 papers being routine. If present, any measurable variation in the unobserved heterogeneity should have led to a non-degenerate posterior of u assumption in (4) was incorrect. Section 5.3 also obtains a degenerate posterior of u more ﬂexible density of u cost density (3) at every point c ∈ [0, 1] by a solid line and a 95% credible band around the predictive density by dotted lines. Bidders are asymmetric in the cost densities. Type 1 (frequent) bidder is more eﬃcient in supplying papers than the other bidders, with type 3 (one-time) bidders being the least eﬃcient. This prediction, especially for types 2 and 3, is precise, as indicated by the tight credible bands. Moreover, by the KS test, we reject the hypothesis that the posterior predictive cost distributions are identical for each pair of types; the relevant p-values are all close to zero. Table 1: Posterior Distributions of CRRA Coeﬃcients and UH Parameters In addition, there is no unobserved heterogeneity, σ≈ 0, which is consistent with The top panels in Figure 3 show, for each type τ ∈ {1, 2, 3}, the posterior mean of the Homogeneous Risk-Aversion. We analyze the data again but imposing η = η τ ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The middle block of Table 1 summarizes the posterior distribution of η, which precisely predicts that all bidders are highly risk-averse. Note that we reject the hypothesis that the posterior distribution of the constrained η is identical to the posterior of η the upper block (heterogeneous CRRA) for each τ ∈ {1, 2, 3}. For this constrained model, there is no unobserved heterogeneity σ middle panels of Figure 3 show the posterior predictive densities (solid) and 95% credible bands (dotted), where the dashed lines copy the predictive densities from the upper block for comparison. Imposing homogeneity in risk-aversion generates a slightly diﬀerent predictive cost density for type 1 bidder, but the other types remain the same. The KS test with the 5% level rejects the hypothesis that the predictive cost distribution remains the same under the constraint for type 1 bidders. Risk-Neutrality. We repeat the exercise but restricting η Figure 3 (bottom) suggest that this misspeciﬁcation induces an overestimation of unobserved heterogeneity and substantial bias in predicting cost densities; the more risk-averse, the larger the bias. Once we impose risk-neutrality, smaller bids in our sample must be justiﬁed by other model components, causing the bias pattern as we observe. For all τ ∈ {1, 2, 3}, the KS test rejects, by p-value ≈ 0, the hypothesis that the cost under η predictive distribution as the cost without the constraint. Russia has constantly been updating the procurement system mainly to reduce government spending, as we mentioned in section 3.1. We, therefore, evaluate counterfactual scenarios by predictive procurement costs and investigate implications of misspeciﬁed risk-aversion. We also compute predictive costs and eﬃciency at other relevant policy options for comparison. Decision Theoretic Approach. Since we study the policymaker’s decision problem, we use a statistical decision-theoretic approach; see Berger (1985) for a survey. Note that Kim (2013) introduces the approach for empirical auction design and Aryal and Kim (2013), Kim (2015), and Aryal, Grundl, Kim, and Zhu (2018) use or extend for diﬀerent contexts. imize the (expected) procurement cost Λ(ρ, θ). Let ρ ρ(θ) is infeasible, however, as θ is uncertain. The posterior π(θ|z) represents the policymaker’s uncertainty about θ, combining his prior and the sample z. Thus, he should choose If the policymaker knows θ, he can choose an action ρ ∈ A, e.g., a reserve price, to min- This is the idea of the Bayesian decision theory and it is similar to the usual expected utility theory. Choosing ρ (1954) and Anscombe and Aumann (1963). A decision rule that maps every data z to ρ is optimal under a frequentist perspective (Bayes risk principle). and, therefore, it may incur smaller procurement costs than a ‘plug-in’ method. Since θ is unknown, the policymaker would choose some ρ 6= ρ function that drops sharply before ρ structure, the policymaker must prefer ρ i.e., ρ a large action must depend on the cost structure and amount of uncertainty. For example, if there is no uncertainty about θ, he would pick ρ Alternatively, if the cost is ﬂat after ρ of bidders, he would choose ρ considering the cost structure and uncertainty. On the other hand, the plug-in approach, which is ﬁrst popularized in empirical auctions by Paarsch (1997), chooses ρ is, the plug-in approach regards the estimate problem, meaning that it ignores parameter uncertainty and the shape of the cost function (other than the fact that ρ prior), ρ Speciﬁcally, a credible interval represents uncertainty associated with θ, but ρ action after integrating out θ by π(θ|z). We instead provide a credible interval of procurement cost at ρ interest and is still uncertain at ρ construct a conﬁdence interval around the plug-in estimate ρ This approach formally considers the structure of the procurement cost and uncertainty − ρ(θ) = ρ(θ) − ρ. Especially, if the cost is (almost) ﬂat after ρ(θ), then, = max A is (almost) equivalent to ρ(θ). The extent to which the policymaker prefers After formalizing uncertainty by the data z and maintained assumptions (model and (z) is certainly the best action. So, no uncertainty notion comes with ρ(z). (z) or other notable actions, which is natural because the cost is the outcome of in random data z in repeated sampling. The conﬁdence interval is designed for testing a hypothesis like ρ E[Λ(ρ, θ)|z], which integrates out θ and I, respectively, by the posterior and the empirical distribution of I, considering (stochastic) reﬁnements of I due to binding reserve prices. Common Reserve Prices. We consider a situation where the policymaker wishes to choose one reserve price and apply it to all bidders regardless of their types, i.e., ρ Figure 4(a) shows E[Λ(ρ, θ)|z] as a function of ρ (solid line) and its 95 percent credible band (dashed lines), i.e., the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of Λ(ρ, θ) under the posterior at every ρ in the ﬁgure. The three dotted lines show the posterior predictive cost and its credible band if the policymaker implements the second-price procurements (SPP). When bidders are riskaverse, bidders bid more aggressively in an FPP than in an SPP. In particular, the ﬁgure shows that the FPP with ρ minimizing reserve price. Panels (b) and (c) show the predictive costs under the models with homogeneous risk-aversion and no risk-aversion, respectively. When bidders are modeled to be risk-averse, the predictive cost is minimized at ρ speciﬁc. When risk-aversion is ignored, however, the method recommends a much smaller reserve price. This result follows from the fact that the cost densities in Figure 3 (bottom) falsely predict a large probability of small costs, especially for type 2 and 3 bidders, while these bidders would draw high costs more likely, Figure 3 (top). is 0.843 with a 95% credible interval of [0.835, 0.850] at the cost-minimizing reserve price ρ(z) := ρ restriction of common reserve price. The table also shows that the eﬃcient bidder wins the procurement with a 99.2% chance at ρ is restricted to be homogeneous. Table S7 also shows that the model with risk-neutrality We explain in section S8 our algorithm to evaluate the predictive procurement cost, The ﬁrst block (common ρ) in Table S7 documents that the predictive procurement cost selects ρ at ρ model predicts 14.0% ≈ |0.729 − 0.848| ÷ 0.848 of cost-reduction at ρ is the predictive cost at ρ this prediction is misleading: the model with asymmetric CRRAs predicts the procurement cost of 0.971 at ρ would win with a 33.2% of chance, but the chance of allocation is only 3.6% under the model with asymmetric CRRAs. That is, if one ignores risk-aversion, the proposed policy will substantially increase the procurement cost, and most procurements will fail to ﬁnd a supplier. Type-Speciﬁc Reserve Prices. Now, we consider the policymaker who can select typespeciﬁc reserve prices. The second block (type-speciﬁc ρ) in Table S7 shows that the model with asymmetric risk-aversion recommends ρ type 1 (most frequent) bidder and this solution, ρ (z), where the superscript RN is for risk-neutrality. That is, this misspeciﬁed (z), moreover, the model under risk-neutrality also predicts that the eﬃcient bidder where the superscript T indicates that the Bayes action is type-speciﬁc. But, the cost saving is marginal relative to the current cost of 0.843 at ρ cost is ﬂat in ρ would be practically cost-equivalent. ignoring risk-aversion introduces a large bias: the method selects ρ at which it predicts the procurement cost of 0.722 (14.9% ≈ |0.722 − 0.848|÷ 0.848 of costsaving), but the model with heterogeneous risk-aversion predicts the cost of 0.965 at ρ (14.5% ≈ |0.965 −0.843|÷0.843 of cost increase). Although eﬃciency is by assumption not of the ﬁrst order interest for the policymaker, the eﬃciency measures predicted with riskneutrality are also severely biased: the model with heterogeneous risk-aversion predicts that When risk-aversion is restricted to be homogeneous, the method still chooses ρ. However, roughly 94% of procurements would fail to ﬁnd a supplier through the mechanism. Cost Reduction from Inviting an Additional Bidder. Finally, we consider the case in which the buyer can invite one additional (genuine) bidder. Bulow and Klemperer (1996) show that inviting an additional bidder would improve the seller’s revenue more than choosing a revenue maximizing reserve price in a standard symmetric auction with risk-neutral bidders. But, it is unclear whether this ﬁnding would hold in our asymmetric model with risk-averse bidders. where bidders are heterogeneous in risk-aversion. When the buyer invites a type 1 bidder, i.e., type 1 bidder is added to all bidder conﬁgurations I, our method predicts the cost of 0.791 with a 95% credible interval of [0.775, 0.804]. The predictive procurement cost in this case is 6.2% (≈ |0.791 − 0.843| ÷ 0.843) smaller than the predictive cost at ρ row in Table S7, with non-overlapping credible intervals. We have similar results when the procurer invites a bidder from other types. When the procurer invites one additional type 2 (3) bidder, the predictive cost would be 0.794 (0.797), which is a 5.8 (5.5)% of cost reduction, with a 95% credible interval of [0.782, 0.805] (of [0.784, 0.811]). ment cost more than selecting the cost-minimizing reserve price. Hence, we ﬁnd that the insight of Bulow and Klemperer (1996) holds for the “printing papers” category of Russian procurements where bidders are asymmetric in both cost density and risk-aversion. This subsection examines how sensitive our empirical ﬁndings are to the deﬁnition of bidder types and prior speciﬁcations. In this subsection, the main speciﬁcation refers to the one with heterogeneous risk-aversion outlined in section 4, i.e., the one that gives the estimates in the top block of Table 1. We then consider ﬁve alternative speciﬁcations. The ﬁrst (second) We evaluate the predictive procurement cost at ρusing the posterior with the model Note that even if a fringe bidder (type 3) is invited, this bidder will lower the procurespeciﬁcation classiﬁes the two (three) most frequent bidders as a type 1 bidder. Recall that the most (second-most) frequent bidder appears in the data 58 (33) times, but the frequency does not change much starting from the third frequent bidder, who appears 14 times; see Figure 1(a). The prior variance of ψ of the third (fourth) speciﬁcation is four times smaller (larger) than the main speciﬁcation; see the cost density (3) where we introduce ψ. The last one adopts a more ﬂexible density for the unobserved heterogeneity {u extend (4) as follows; where σ geneity is indexed by a three dimensional parameter vector (µ main speciﬁcation indexes f such as σ under the main speciﬁcation; see section S9.1. We test the hypothesis that the predictive distribution of type 1 bidder’s cost remains the same when we change the deﬁnition of type 1 bidder to include the second frequent bidder: Table 3 reports that the associated p-value is 0.425, and we fail to reject the hypothesis at any conventional level. Similarly, we conduct the hypothesis testing for other types. Then, we repeat it for the other speciﬁcations. In all cases, we fail to reject the hypothesis that the predictive cost distribution remains the same. KS test strongly rejects, with p values close to zero, the hypothesis that the predictive distribution of {u} under the main speciﬁcation is the same as the distribution under the alternative speciﬁcation for each of the ﬁve cases; see column (4) of Table 3. The speciﬁcations, however, unanimously predict that {u , u) = (1, 1 − c× σ); see (4). Note that we use a ﬂat prior for all the other parameters All the ﬁve alternative speciﬁcations produce predictive cost densities close to the ones We also consider the predictive distribution of the unobserved heterogeneity {u}. The standard deviation are approximately one and zero; see column (5) of Table 3. This is an example to show that a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence can be economically meaningless. {1, 2, 3}. Including the second frequent bidder in type 1 does not change the prediction on η, but the third bidder, when classiﬁed as type 1, inﬂates the prediction on η should be natural if the third bidder is similar to type 2 bidders as suggested by the entrance rate (Figure 1(a)) because type 2 bidders are highly risk-averse. The stronger prior on ψ shrinks the prediction on η change the prediction. The prediction on (η samples of those types are 7 to 10 times larger than type 1. Overall, all the speciﬁcations give qualitatively the same prediction on (η and the other bidders are highly risk-averse with η any conventional level, the hypothesis that the posterior of η the same as the posterior of η tween the speciﬁcations would not be large enough to induce an economically signiﬁcant impact on the policymaker’s decision problem. When the policymaker applies a common Table 4 summarizes the posterior of the type-speciﬁc CRRA coeﬃcients, ηfor τ ∈ However, the statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the posterior distributions of ηbereserve price to all bidders, our decision method selects the current reserve price as the costminimizing price under all the speciﬁcations, giving similar predictions on the procurement cost and the likelihood of the lowest bidder winning the procurement; see the upper block of Table 5. When the policymaker can choose bidder-speciﬁc reserve prices, our method selects diﬀerent reserve prices for type 1 depending on the speciﬁcation. As we discussed in the previous subsection, the predictive cost with the main speciﬁcation is practically the same for ρnear one at (ρ costs as a function of ρ ρnear one, especially when the cost functions are evaluated by Monte Carlo, but all giving similar predictions on the outcome variables of interest; see the lower block of Table 5. All the speciﬁcations predict that the current mechanism is eﬀectively cost-minimizing. Finally, we repeat the counterfactual analysis of inviting one additional bidder for each alternative speciﬁcation and obtain predictions on the outcome variables of interest that are similar to the prediction under the main speciﬁcation; see section S9.2. We conclude this paper with a discussion about some possible extensions to our method. First, one may consider a non-separable unobserved heterogeneity instead of the separable one as introduced in Assumption 3-3. To be speciﬁc, if u is discrete with a ﬁnite support and if b with |I| ≥ 3 identiﬁes the conditional bid distribution given u for the given I, following Hu, McAdams, and Shum (2013). Those identiﬁed conditional bid distributions at any u in its ﬁnite support then identify {F 237 procurements out of T = 411, approximately 58%, have only |I| = 2 bidders, and we do not consider this speciﬁcation for estimation. ﬁxing a type for each bidder. For example, An (2017) proposes a method to estimate bidder types. Our sample, however, does not meet its requirement. In particular, every bidder must appear at least in three diﬀerent procurements. But, this is not the case in our data, where 84% of bidders enter once or twice. In our Bayesian setting, alternatively, we may model each bidder’s membership to a type as a random variable following the Dirichlet prior. This approach is standard with a range of applications, e.g., Dirichlet process mixture; see Ferguson (1973) and Escobar and West (1995) among others. If applied here, however, it (u) = β(c|u, I) is strictly increasing in u for all i ∈ I, the bid distribution for I Second, one may treat bidders’ type as an additional parameter to estimate instead of would further complicate our method and substantially increase computing time. the speciﬁcation (3) to accommodate x and f for the cost density with x indexed by (x the exponential density with the mean exp(x cost by F (c|x understand this speciﬁcation, consider its log density where ex parametric family and reduces the error by the additional terms. Therefore, if the parametric family oﬀers a good ﬁt, ψ So, the speciﬁcation is a parsimonious and yet ﬂexible representation of the cost density with covariates. This approach has been used before, e.g., see Kim (2013), Aryal and Kim (2013), Kim (2015), and Aryal, Grundl, Kim, and Zhu (2018). Finally, a dataset may contain procurement-speciﬁc covariates, x. We can also adapt :=eF (c|x, γ). That is, this speciﬁcation ﬁrst approximates the cost density by the