Choosing an Optimal Method for Causal Decomposition Analysis: A Better Practice for Identifying Contributing Factors to Health Disparities Causal decomposition analysis provides a way to identify mediators that contribute to health disparities between marginalized and non-marginalized groups. In particular, the degree to which a disparity would be reduced/remain after intervening on a mediator is of interest. Yet, estimating disparity reduction/remaining might be challenging for many researchers, possibly because there is a lack of understanding of how each estimation method diﬀers from other methods. In addition, there is no appropriate estimation method available for a certain setting (i.e., a regression-based approach with a categorical mediator). Therefore, we review the merits and limitations of the existing three estimation methods (i.e., regression, weighting, and imputation) and provide two new extensions that are useful in practical settings. A ﬂexible new method uses an extended imputation approach to address a categorical and continuous mediator/outcome while incorporating any nonlinear relationships. A new regression method provides a simple estimator that performs well in terms of bias and variance but at the cost of assuming linearity, except for exposure–mediator interactions. Recommendations are given for choosing methods based on a review of diﬀerent methods and simulation studies. We demonstrate the practice of choosing an optimal method by identifying mediators that reduce race–gender disparity in cardiovascular health, using data from the Midlife Development in the US study. We also oﬀer open-source software for R (causal.decomp) that implements some estimation methods presented in the study. epidemiology, researchers have been investigating the degree to which health disparities exist between marginalized and non-marginalized groups, as deﬁned by social characteristics, such as gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES), and sexual orientation. More importantly, health disparity researchers across disciplines have been interested in identifying mediators that produce disparities. One statistical framework that allows researchers to identify mediators underlying disparities is causal decomposition analysis (Jackson & VanderWeele, 2018). Causal decomposition analysis was developed under the potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1978), which facilitates deriving a valid conclusion by precisely deﬁning causal estimands (i.e., eﬀects of interest), identifying assumptions that allow a causal interpretation of the estimands, and providing a ﬂexible estimation method that allows nonlinear relationships. In addition, causal decomposition analysis approaches mediation from an interventional perspective—i.e., how intervening on mediators in a certain way would change disparities (Nguyen, Schmid, & Stuart, 2020). In line with this interventional perspective, disparity reduction/remaining is deﬁned as the degree to which the disparity would be reduced or remain if we hypothetically intervened to make the distribution of mediators equal between marginalized and non-marginalized groups. This intervention, although hypothetical, is policy-relevant since it requires adjusting the level of mediators (such as college education) of a marginalized group to the level of a non-marginalized group. reduction/remaining. The developed methods include a regression-based approach (Jackson & VanderWeele, 2018), a weighting-based approach (Jackson, 2019), and an Choosing an Optimal Method for Causal Decomposition Analysis: A Better Practice for Identifying Contributing Factors to Health Disparities Across disciplines, for example, health psychology, medical sociology, and Recently, many estimation methods have been developed for estimating this disparity imputation-based approach (Park, Lee, & Qin, 2020) reduction/remaining might be challenging for many researchers possibly because there is 1) a lack of understanding of how each estimation method diﬀers and performs compared to other methods and 2) a lack of estimation methods in certain settings (e.g., a regression-based approach with a categorical mediator). While all three approaches can reasonably estimate disparity reduction/remaining, they vary in their advantages and disadvantages, depending on the data at hand and the researchers’ assumptions. Therefore, we discuss each method’s merits and limitations based on a review of the methods and small-scale simulation studies. We also provide two extensions to existing methods that are useful in settings diﬀerent from those in the aforementioned studies. As a result, the current study aims to oﬀer general guidelines for choosing an optimal method to estimate disparity reduction/remaining. Section 3, we will brieﬂy introduce causal decomposition analysis in the context of the motivating example. In Section 4, we will review three estimation methods that can be used to quantify disparity reduction/remaining and present two extensions to the existing methods that are useful. In Section 5, we will conduct small-scale simulation studies to compare performances of the ﬁve methods. Based on a review of the methods and small-scale simulation studies, we provide recommendations for selecting optimal estimation methods in the context of the motivation example (Section 6). In Section 7, we conclude with a discussion. methods presented here is available from XX [to be updated]. Code to replicate all analyses can be found in Supplementary Materials. In the following section (Section 2), we will present our motivating example. I n Open-source software for R (causal.decomp) that implements some of the estimation health (CVH). Despite robust declines in cardiovascular disease (CVD) mortality in the US over 50 years, racial and ethnic diﬀerences in the burden of CVD are still prominent. To improve CVD free longevity and reduce health disparities in populations, the American Heart Association (AHA) introduced the ideal CVH metric (known as Life’s Simple 7) in 2010 to encourage lifestyle changes, including blood pressure management, cholesterol control, blood glucose reduction, physical activity, healthy diet, weight loss, and tobacco cessation. A decade of evidence, however, shows that Blacks, particularly Black women, are far less likely than Whites to achieve ideal CVH scores. While observing CVH disparities between Black women and Whites is important, Lee, Park, and Boylan (2021) seek to investigate mediators that produce such disparities. partially explain racial/ethnic disparities in CVH (Bey, Jesdale, Forrester, Person, & Kiefe, 2019). There has also been growing interest in the role of early-life environments and circumstances (Suglia et al., 2018). Speciﬁcally, throughout the life course, Blacks are socially disadvantaged relative to Whites in the US across multiple domains, including educational attainment, income, and wealth (Maxwell, 1994; Oliver & Shapiro, 2013; Pollack et al., 2013), as well as health care access and insurance coverage (Lê Cook, McGuire, & Zuvekas, 2009; Sohn, 2017). Women of color (e.g., Black women) are particularly likely to experience insecure economic positions (Brown, 2012). However, racial/ethnic diﬀerences in health outcomes persist even after accounting for SES (Hayward, Miles, Crimmins, & Yang, 2000; Williams, Priest, & Anderson, 2019), and a growing body of literature supports the notion that exposure to interpersonal racial discrimination contributes to health disparities (Williams & Sternthal, 2010). Moreover, some stressful events in early life, including sexual abuse, are more common for racial or gender minorities. Such trauma might negatively inﬂuence cognitive and socioemotional As a motivating example, we investigate gendered racial disparities in cardiovascular Prior studies have found that socioeconomic status (SES) and discrimination development and increase the likelihood of engaging in unhealthy behaviors and lifestyles (Miller, Chen, & Parker, 2011; Shonkoﬀ, Boyce, & McEwen, 2009), which may in turn have life-long consequences for CVH. the US (MIDUS) study and the MIDUS Refresher who identiﬁed themselves either as non-Hispanic White or non-Hispanic Black. Racial and gender statuses were created using the nexus of self-identiﬁed race/ethnicity and gender (i.e., White men, White women, Black men, and Black women). CVH was assessed in accordance with the AHA’s criteria for seven components: smoking, BMI, physical activity, diet, total cholesterol, blood pressure, and fasting glucose. A composite score of CVH was created where higher values indicate better CVH that sums the criteria for ideal, intermediate, or poor CVH for each component. abuse, perceived discrimination, and education) that explain cardiovascular disparities across gender and racial groups. Childhood abuse is an index measuring experiences of emotional, physical, or sexual abuse, with possible responses to each item ranging from 1 (never true) to 5 (very often true). As for perceived discrimination, respondents were asked to report the number of times in their life they faced “discrimination” in each of 11 domains. Education is a variable that indicates the highest level of degree completed, which ranges from 1 = no school/some grade school to 12 = PhD, MD, or other professional degree. We use this motivating example throughout the manuscript. and arrows represent causal eﬀects. It is important to delineate our hypothesized causal structure between variables because we formulate research questions and determine variables that should be controlled for based on this hypothesized causal structure. The race-gender variable is denoted as R; CVH is denoted as Y . On the pathway from race-gender (R) to CVH (Y ), we hypothesize three mediators: childhood abuse (M Lee et al. (2021) used a sample of 1978 respondents from the Midlife Development in To test the mechanisms, the authors considered three life-course mediators (childhood Figure 1 shows a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) in which nodes represent variables Figure 1 . Directed acyclic graph showing the relationship between intersectional status, cardiovascular health, and three potential mediators discrimination (M childhood socioeconomic status (S) is correlated with race through historical processes (H) that include racism. We also assume that baseline covariates (age C vulnerability C encompass both C the previous study, we do not specify a causal ordering between these mediators because the relationship between the mediators could be bidirectional. For example, one could imagine that poor education could exacerbate discrimination. On the contrary, discrimination could lead to lower levels of educational achievement (Park et al., 2020). One way to address this unclear or bidirectional causal ordering of mediators is simultaneously intervening on these multiple mediators (VanderWeele & Vansteelandt, 2014). would equalizing the exposure to childhood abuse across race-gender groups reduce CVH disparity, and 2) to what extent equalizing education and perceived discrimination simultaneously across race-gender groups reduce CVH disparity? In line with these Note that there is no arrow between discrimination (M) and education (M). Unlike Given this DAG, we formulated the following research questions: 1) to what extent questions, we consider two hypothetical interventions of equalizing distributions across groups of the following mediators: 1) childhood abuse and 2) education and discrimination. For each intervention, we controlled for the same baseline covariates (i.e., age and genetic vulnerability) but diﬀerent intermediate confounders. Intermediate confounders are the variables that confound the mediator-outcome relationship and are measured after or concurrently with the exposure (race or gender). For intervention 1, childhood SES (S) serves as an intermediate confounder, and for intervention 2, childhood SES (S) and childhood abuse (M marginalized and non-marginalized groups. Then, we move on to decomposing the observed disparity into disparity reduction and remaining due to a hypothetical intervention. Throughout the paper, we focus on disparities conditional on baseline covariates to ensure comparability across diﬀerent estimation methods. However, marginal disparities can be obtained by averaging over baseline covariates. outcome between marginalized and non-marginalized groups among those who have the same value of baseline covariates. Suppose that we are interested in the CVH disparity between Black women (R =1; comparison group) and White men (R =0; reference group) among those who have the same age and genetic vulnerability. Then, the initial disparity for Black women compared to White men is formally deﬁned as ·(1, 0) © E[Y |R =1,c] ≠ E[Y |R =0,c], where c œ C. Note that the deﬁned initial disparity is simply the observed mean diﬀerence in an outcome between marginalized and non-marginalized groups given baseline covariates. Thus, this is not causal unless assumptions are invoked, such as no omitted confounding. While the causal eﬀect of race or gender is certainly conceivable, we do not attempt to measure this causal eﬀect of race In this section, we ﬁrst begin by quantifying the observed disparity between Initial Disparity. The observed disparity is deﬁned as the average diﬀerence in an or gender since social-demographic factors are essentially non-modiﬁable (VanderWeele & Robinson, 2014). men, we would also want to know how to reduce the disparity, for example, by reducing Black women’s exposure to childhood abuse to the level of White men. Statistically, this hypothetical intervention requires assigning Black women’s abuse with values randomly drawn from the distribution of White men’s abuse. As shown in Table 1, the disparity reduction due to intervening on childhood abuse contrasts the following two conditions: 1) CVH for Black women and 2) CVH for Black women after assigning their abuse with random draws from the distribution of White men’s abuse. The diﬀerence between the two conditions (1-2) estimates how much the disparity for Black women would be reduced if we hypothetically intervene to decrease Black women’s abuse to the level of White men. Likewise, the disparity remaining contrasts the following two conditions: 2) CVH for Black women after assigning their abuse with random draws from the distribution of White men’s abuse and 3) CVH for White men. The diﬀerence between the two conditions (2-3) estimates how much the disparity for Black women would remain even after the hypothetical intervention to decrease Black women’s abuse to the level of White men. Table 1 Decomposition of the initial disparity baseline covariates be denoted as G for Black women if their abuse level was the same as White men who have the same age Intervention 1. Once we observed the disparity between Black women and White 2 Expected CVH for Black women after decreasing E[Y (G(0))|R =1,c] their abuse to the level of White men Formally, let a random value drawn from the distribution of White men’s abuse given and genetic vulnerability as Y (G formally deﬁned as ” ’(0) © E[Y (G obtained by summing disparity reduction and remaining as · (1, 0) = ” outcome–i.e., Y (G potential outcome to an observable quantity. The assumptions include 1) conditional independence, 2) positivity, and 3) consistency. The conditional independence states no omitted confounding in the mediator-outcome relationship given race-gender status (R), intermediate confounder (S), and baseline covariates (C). The positivity assumes 1) a positive conditional probability of race-gender status given covariates and 2) a positive conditional probability among Black women (R =1) of each observed value for the mediator given covariates. Finally, the consistency assumes that the observed outcome under a particular exposure value is the same as the outcome after intervening to set the exposure to that value. All these assumptions are strong and whether the assumptions are met or not depends on a substantive example. The identiﬁcation results are shown in Supplementary Materials. education and discrimination) can be deﬁned the same way. Disparity reduction/remaining are deﬁned as how much the disparity would be reduced/remain if we hypothetically intervene to equalize education and discrimination simultaneously between Black women and White men. Formal deﬁnitions as well as identiﬁcation assumptions and results for intervention 2 are shown in Supplementary Materials. The deﬁned disparity reduction and remaining can be estimated via methods reviewed in the next section. This deﬁnition of disparity reduction/remaining involves an unobservable potential Intervention 2. The disparity reduction/remaining due to multiple mediators (i.e., remaining and provide two extensions of existing methods that can be used in practical settings. Jackson and VanderWeele (2018). The method can be applied to a case of a single continuous mediator. Therefore, we use intervention 1 (childhood abuse) for illustrating this method. For simplicity, we only focus on the disparity between Black women (R =1) and White men (R =0). The speciﬁc estimation procedure for disparity reduction/remaining is as follows. 1. Fit outcome models regressed on race-gender status, baseline covariates, and In this section, we review three estimation methods for disparity reduction and Regression-Based Method. The regression-based method was ﬁrst introduced by additionally intermediate confounding (child SES S), and ﬁnally the mediator (childhood abuse M) as where „represents the CVH disparity between Black women and White men given baseline covariates; “represents the disparity within levels of child SES given baseline covariates; ◊represents the disparity remaining after intervening to equalize childhood abuse across groups within the level of child SES given baseline covariates. To ensure that these regression coeﬃcients are the eﬀect estimates given C = c, covariates should be centered at C = c (continuous) or be a reference group (categorical) when ﬁtting these models. Note that ˆ“ within levels of child SES (S) given baseline covariates. This estimate is meaningful if investigators are interested in an intervention to remove disparities in childhood abuse that cannot be attributable to the disparities in child SES. However, Jackson and VanderWeele (2018) argue that this estimate within levels of child SES may not be desirable because achieving disparity reductions for children who have the same child SES is sub-optimal. For example, if we only consider those who have a high level of child SES, the disparity reduction after equalizing childhood abuse between the groups is likely underestimated compared to those across all levels of child SES. Graphically, the disparity reduction estimate within levels of child SES excludes the following path: R æ S æ M through and not through M proportion of the mediated portion via childhood abuse (1 ≠ of child SES ( diﬀer from the conventional diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients approach. However, hereafter, we refer to this method as the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator to diﬀerentiate it from the new type of regression-based method that we introduced later. regression-based approach is eﬃcient in terms of standard errors and is generally straightforward to use. However, this diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator is not straightforward for outcome models with nonlinear relationships (e.g., interactions). In disparities research, it is common to specify diﬀerential eﬀects of mediators on the outcome remaining is estimated asˆ’(0) =ˆ◊+(ˆ◊/ˆ“)(ˆ„≠ ˆ“). To obtain disparity reduction across all levels of child SES, we add /ˆ“)(ˆ◊≠ ˆ“), which is the mediated eﬀect of child SES (ˆ◊≠ ˆ“) scaled by the )(ˆ„≠ ˆ“) to disparity remaining after intervening on childhood abuse within levels Standard errors can be obtained by delta methods or bootstraps. The by race or gender. For example, previous literature indicates that the eﬀect of perceived discrimination on CVH is larger for White men than Black women (Bey et al., 2019). The estimator does not allow any diﬀerential eﬀects to be incorporated without further calculations. results in biased estimates. With a binary outcome, the estimator generally produces biased estimates due to varying scales across nested logistic/probit regressions (for detailed information, refer to MacKinnon, Cheong, & Pirlott, 2012). With a binary mediator, caution is required since this estimator approximates the sample average of mediation eﬀects only when the exposure distribution is symmetric (Li, Schneider, & Bennett, 2007). estimators: ratio of mediator probability weighting (RMPW) and inverse odds ratio weighting (IORW) estimation. According to that study, the two estimators perform similarly, but IORW has a higher burden in terms of modeling perspectives as IORW requires ﬁtting two additional exposure models. Therefore, we only address RMPW in this study. The RMPW estimator can be applied for a single categorical mediator, and thus, we use a dichotomized childhood abuse variable as a mediator for illustration. The speciﬁc estimation procedure is as follows. 1. Fit a mediator model, regressing childhood abuse on baseline covariates among White 2. Fit another mediator model, regressing childhood abuse on baseline covariates and In addition, the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator with a binary mediator/outcome Weighting-Based Method. Jackson (2019) developed two weighting-based men (R =0). Since childhood abuse is dichotomized, we use logistic regression. Based on this ﬁtted model, compute the predicted probability of Mgiven Cfor each subject (i.e., P (M|R =0,C)). the intermediate confounder (child SES) among Black women (R =1). Based on this ﬁtted model, compute the predicted probability of Mgiven Sand Cfor each subject (i.e., P (M|R =1,S,C)). 3. Calculate the average CVH (Y ) among Black women given C = c, weighted by the 4. Calculate the average CVH for Black women and White men given C = c (i.e., Refer to Jackson (2019) for marginal eﬀects that are averaged over covariates. Standard errors can be obtained from bootstraps. terms since the estimator does not change regardless of the ﬁtted models. In modeling perspectives, the estimator is also advantageous since it requires ﬁtting two diﬀerent mediator models only. Disadvantages of this estimator, however, include that it only addresses categorical mediators since most weighting-based approaches do not work very well with continuous variables. Also, weighting-based approaches are generally less eﬃcient in terms of standard errors compared to regression-based approaches (VanderWeele, 2010a). et al. (2020) to address the case of intervening on multiple mediators that are continuous or categorical. Therefore, we use intervention 2 (education and discrimination) to illustrate this method. The speciﬁc estimation procedure is as follows. 1. Fit confounder models, regressing each confounder (childhood SES and child abuse) ratio of the two predicted probabilities as W=. This estimates E[WY|R =1,C = c]. This quantity is obtained as the intercept in a weighted regression of Y on C among individuals with R =1. Covariates should be centered at C = c or be a reference group when ﬁtting this regression model. E[Y |R =1,c] and E[Y |R =0,c]). Likewise, these quantities are obtained as the intercept in a regression of Y on C among individuals with R =1and R =0, respectively. disparity remaining is estimated asˆ’(c)=ˆE[ˆWY|R =1,c] ≠ˆE[Y |R =0,c]. One advantage of this RMPW estimator is its ﬂexibility to accommodate nonlinear Imputation-Based Metho d. The imputation-based method is developed by Park on the race-gender group and baseline covariates as Â(c) © p(S,M|R= r, C= c). 2. Fit an outcome model, regressing CVH on the race-gender group, intermediate 3. The predicted outcome values obtained from step 2 will be average over i among Refer to Park et al. (2020) for marginal eﬀects that are averaged over covariates. Standard errors can be obtained from bootstraps. refer to this method as the multiple-mediator-imputation estimator. This multiple-mediator-imputation estimator is perhaps the most ﬂexible among the existing estimators since it can address 1) any nonlinear terms, 2) multiple mediators and a single mediator, and 3) diﬀerent variable types of confounders and mediators. However, depending on the causal structure of variables, there could be more burden in correctly specifying models than regression- or weighting-based methods. This estimator requires ﬁtting models for intermediate confounders instead of mediators. Therefore, this estimator is advantageous (in terms of modeling burden) only when the number of mediators exceeds or equals the number of intermediate confounders. Based on the ﬁtted models, we compute a predicted value of confounders for each subject (denoted as ˜sand ˜m) among White men (R =0), after forcing R =1. confounders, mediators, and baseline covariates as µ(c) © E(Y|R = r, S= s, M= m,M= m,M= m,C= c). Based on the ﬁtted outcome model, compute a predicted outcome value for each subject among White men (R =0), after forcing R =1, and imputing ˜sand ˜mas µ(C). White men given C = c. This computes E[Y (G(0))|R =1,c]=µ(c), where is the subjects (of size n) in group R =0. ˆ”(0) =ˆE[Y |R =1,c] ≠ˆE[Y (G(0))|R =1,c] and disparity remaining is estimated asˆ’(0) =ˆE[Y (G(0))|R =1,c] ≠ˆE[Y |R =0,c]. To diﬀerentiate this estimator with the new imputation method introduced later, we 4.2. Two Extensions is straightforward to use, it is less useful when diﬀerential eﬀects of the mediator exist by groups. Diﬀerential eﬀects by groups are common in disparities research, so assuming constant mediator eﬀects across groups may be too restrictive in many empirical settings. Furthermore, the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator cannot address a categorical mediator or outcome. of two coeﬃcients: one from a mediator model and another from an outcome model. This model will be referred as the product-of-coeﬃcients estimator although the estimator diﬀers from the one often used in conventional mediation analysis. This product-of-coeﬃcients estimator allows a diﬀerential eﬀect of mediators by groups and can be easily modiﬁed to address a categorical mediator. Still, the simplicity of a regression-based approach is maintained. A speciﬁc estimation procedure using intervention 1 is as follows. 1. After centering C = c, ﬁt a mediator and outcome model as 3. For a categorical mediator, – Product-of-Coeﬃcients Method. While the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator Therefore, a new type of regression-based approach is introduced here using a product remaining is estimated asˆ’(c)=ˆ„≠ ˆ–◊ (ˆ—+ˆ—), whereˆ„is the initial disparity given covariates. Alternatively, if investigators are willing to additionally model intermediate confounders,ˆ’(c)=ˆ—+ˆ—ˆŸ+ˆ—ˆ–, where ˆŸis the average disparity in child SES (S) between Black women and White men (R =1and R =0, respectively) given the covariates. A proof for this estimator is shown in Appendix A. probability of M = m for White men given covariates; –is no longer the average Note that disparity reduction is the product of ˆ– disparity in childhood abuse between Black women and White men given baseline covariates. In conventional mediation analysis, instead of ˆ– childhood abuse was used within levels of child SES given baseline covariates. This conventional estimator is interested in removing disparities in childhood abuse that cannot be attributable to the disparities in child SES. In contrast, we are interested in removing disparities in childhood abuse across all levels of child SES. perspectives, the alternative estimator is less advantageous than the original estimator since we must additionally model intermediate confounders. Later, our simulation study shows that the original estimator only works for a continuous mediator while the alternative estimator works for continuous or categorical mediators. categorical outcome and nonlinear terms other than exposure-mediator interactions, for which either a weighting or imputation method should be considered. Still, this estimator has advantages over the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients estimator because a categorical mediator and exposure-mediator interactions can be addressed. estimator is ﬂexible enough to accommodate both multiple mediators and a single mediator, the estimator may not be necessarily advantageous for a single mediator’s case in modeling perspectives. The estimator does not require researchers to model mediators but, instead, intermediate confounders. Therefore, the estimator is beneﬁcial when the number of mediators exceeds the number of intermediate confounders. In the case of a single mediator, the estimator is no longer beneﬁcial if there is more than one intermediate confounder (because the number of mediator is one), which is likely in many settings. disparity in M, but the average probability diﬀerence in M = m between Black women and White men given covariates. Here, we present two ways of estimating remaining disparity. In modeling One disadvantage of this product-of-coeﬃcients estimator is that it cannot address a Single-Mediator-Imputation Method. While the multiple-mediator-imputation modiﬁed imputation-based approach designed for a single mediator. This new single-mediator-imputation estimator can address the single mediator’s case without the burden of specifying extra confounder models while maintaining its beneﬁt of ﬂexibility in addressing nonlinear terms and diﬀerent variable types of mediators and outcome. We illustrate this modiﬁed approach with intervention 1 (childhood abuse). 1. Fit a mediator model, regressing the mediator (childhood abuse) on the race-gender 2. Fit an outcome model, regressing CVH on the race-gender group, intermediate 3. The predicted outcome values obtained from step 2 will be averaged over i among We only present disparity reduction/remaining conditional on covariates here. However, we provide a proof for marginal eﬀects in Appendix C. Note that models for a mediator and To alleviate burdens of modeling many intermediate confounders, we present a group and baseline covariates as „(c) © p(M|R= r, C= c). Based on the ﬁtted model, we compute the predicted value of the mediator for each subject (denoted as ˜m) among Black women (R =1), after forcing R =0. confounder, mediator, and baseline covariates as µ(c) © E(Y|R= r, S= s, M= m,C= c). Based on the ﬁtted model, compute a predicted outcome value for each subject among Black women after imputing ˜mas µ(c). Black women given C = c. This computes E[Y (G(0))|R =1,c]=µ(c), where is the subjects (of size n) in group R =1. ˆ”(c)=ˆE[Y |R =1,c] ≠ˆE[Y (G(0))|R =1,c] and disparity remaining is estimated asˆ’(c)=ˆE[Y (G(0))|R =1,c] ≠ˆE[Y |R =0,c]. A proof for this estimator is shown in Appendix B. an outcome were ﬁtted as in the product-of-coeﬃcients estimator for a continuous mediator. While the same burden of modeling is required between the two estimators, this single-mediator-imputation estimator can address any nonlinear terms while the product-of-coeﬃcients estimator can address only the exposure-mediator interaction. Standard errors can be obtained via bootstraps. conditions through a small but thorough simulation study. This simulation study focuses on intervening on a single mediator in which multiple estimation methods are available. For simplicity, we refer to diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients, product-of-coeﬃcients, RMPW, single-mediator-imputation, and multiple-mediator-imputation as estimators 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, in this section. treatment R is created, which takes the value of 0 or 1, with the probability of 0.5 for randomly assigning the value for each observation. For observations with R =1,a covariate C is generated from a truncated normal distribution with mean 50 and standard deviation 12 within the interval (25, 75); For observations with R =0, a covariate C is generated from the same distribution but with the shifted mean to 48. The generated C is dichotomized by 50, taking the value of 1 or 2. We then create S, M, and Y using equations (3), (4), and (5), respectively, with added error terms from a standard normal distribution. To generate synthetic data that mimics real data, we use the relationship between variables in the MIDUS data from Section 2 to create S, M, and Y . This section compares the performances of the estimation methods under diﬀerent Data Generation. The procedure for data generation is as follows. First, a binary dichotomized by its median to ﬁt the logistic regression of (4). Then a binary mediator is generated for the synthetic data that takes the value of 0 or 1 with the probability 2. We ﬁxed the percentage of disparity reduction as 30% across diﬀerent settings to ensure comparability. performance of the estimation methods may depend on the variable type. For each type of mediator, we consider three sample sizes n = {100, 500, 1000}, which cover reasonably small and large sample sizes. For each ﬁxed sample size, an important condition that we vary is the ratio between the R ≠ M and M ≠ Y association, which is computed as If some estimation methods are sensitive to this ratio, its performance would change as the ratio varies. We here consider r = {0.3, 0.5, 1, 2, 3}, which covers low and high ratios. As this ratio increases, the R ≠ M association increases compared to the M ≠ Y association. Thus, we consider 15 scenarios with diﬀerent n and r values for each type of mediator. To set the desired level of the ratio r, we change the coeﬃcients. Table 2 shows how to set the coeﬃcients for each scenario. Other than the three coeﬃcient values in the table, the remaining coeﬃcient values are ﬁxed as the coeﬃcients from the MIDUS data. performance comparison between the estimation methods: bias, the root mean square errors (RMSE), and 95% conﬁdence interval coverage using the percentile bootstrap method (Efron, 1982) with the number of bootstrap replicates B = 1000. For each scenario, we make M = 1000 replicates of sample, and the performances are averaged over the 1000 repetitions. Let and disparity remaining from the bth bootstrap sample of the mth sample replicate. For a binary mediator case, the same procedure is used, but we use an M Simulation Setting. We use a binary and continuous mediator since the |E(Y |R =1,S = s, M =1,C = c) ≠ E(Y |R =1,S = s, M =0,C = c)| Performance Metrics. In this study, the following metrics are used for Table 2 Coeﬃcient values for each scenario and corresponding parameters 1. The biases: 2. The root mean square errors (RMSEs): 3. The 95% conﬁdence interval coverage: where ”(c) and ’(c) are the true disparity reduction and remaining from population data, respectively. where (ˆ”,ˆ”) and (ˆ’,ˆ’) are the 95% bootstrap conﬁdence interval for the disparity reduction and disparity remaining of the mth sample replicate, respectively. are summarized in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. The exact numerical values of the performance metrics can also be found in Supplementary Materials. From Figure 2, the ﬁrst thing to notice is estimator 1’s poor performance compared to the others. It provides a biased estimate, and the coverage rate does not reach the nominal level even with a sample size of 1000. This poor performance is not surprising given that estimator 1 cannot address any nonlinear terms. ratio of 2 or higher. However, with smaller sample sizes or a ratio less than 2, the estimators do perform diﬀerently. With a sample size of 100 and 500, estimators 2 and 5 perform equally well regarding bias and coverage, regardless of ratios. Yet, estimator 2 demonstrates a smaller RMSE. For example, RMSEs for disparity reduction obtained from estimators 2 and 5 (with a sample size of 100 and a ratio of 0.3) are 0.202 and 0.308, respectively. This implies that estimator 2 performs the best for a continuous mediator in terms of bias and variance. less than 2. Even with a sample size of 1000, the coverage rate for disparity reduction exceeds 0.98 with a ratio less than 2. This implies that estimator 4 is ineﬃcient in terms of standard errors (here, shown as wide conﬁdence intervals) when the exposure-mediator association is less than twice the mediator-outcome association. Section 4, estimator 1 cannot address a binary mediator and any nonlinear relationships. Except for estimator 1, all estimators for disparity reduction perform well with a sample size of 1000 and a ratio of 1 or higher. With smaller sample sizes (n = 100 and 500), estimators 2, 4, and 5 perform equally well in terms of RMSE and coverage. Yet, estimator 2 demonstrates the smaller bias for disparity reduction than the other estimators. Simulation Results. The simulation results for a continuous and binary mediator Except for estimator 1, all estimators perform well with a sample size of 1000 and a Unlike estimators 2 and 5, estimator 4 shows a high coverage rate when the ratio is Again, from Figure 3, we observe a biased result for estimator 1. As discussed in One noteworthy thing is a biased result of estimator 2 for disparity remaining. The Figure 2 . Performances of disparity reduction (A) and disparity remaining (B) with a continuous mediator. Figure 3 . Performances of disparity reduction (A) and disparity remaining (B) with a binary mediator. disparity remaining estimate is biased with the original estimator ( In contrast, the estimate is unbiased with the alternative estimator, as shown in Figure 4. By additionally modeling intermediate confounders, estimator 2 demonstrates superior performance compared to the other estimators. This result suggests that the alternative estimator for disparity remaining should be used for a binary mediator. Figure 4 . Performances of estimator 2 between original and alternative disparity remaining estimate with a binary mediator. 1. When the exposure-mediator association is less than the mediator-outcome association, the coverage rate for estimator 3 decreases dramatically. For example, with a sample size of 100 and a ratio of 0.3, the coverage rate is 0.85. This low coverage rate is due to narrower conﬁdence intervals than the nominal level, potentially leading to a wrong conclusion. Another thing to note is a low coverage rate for estimator 3 when the ratio is less than Choosing Between Methods recommendations for selecting an optimal method. We illustrate the practice of choosing an optimal method through reanalysis of Lee et al. (2021). The availability of estimation methods depends on the variable types of the mediator and outcome, the number of mediators, and the modeling assumptions that researchers are willing to make (e.g., nonlinearity). Therefore, the ﬁrst step is to check which methods are available given the research questions and data at hand. Table 3 shows the summary of available estimation methods depending on conditions. From the table, we note that the diﬀerence-in-coeﬃcients method is the most restrictive while the multiple-mediator-imputation method is the most ﬂexible. be reduced if we reduce the exposure to childhood abuse for Black women to the level of White men. The mediator is childhood abuse (mean =1.44, SD =0.62) and the outcome is CVH, where higher values indicate better CVH (mean =8.09, SD =2.12). We model diﬀerential eﬀects of childhood abuse between Black women and White men (interaction between R and M available: product-of-coeﬃcients, single-mediator-imputation, and multiple-mediator-imputation (estimators 2, 4, and 5 from Table 3). Normally, the multiple-mediator-imputation method may not be the best choice for a single mediator’s case due to the burden of modeling intermediate confounders. However, in the context of our example, there is only one intermediate confounder (child SES) for intervention 1. Therefore, the multiple-mediator-imputation method is still a good option. options. Suppose a software package supports the application of all methods (although this is not true). In that case, one should consider both the bias and eﬃciency of estimators Based on our review of the methods and the simulation study, we provide For intervention 1, our research question is to what extent the CVH disparity would One question that remains is which method should be used among these multiple Table 3 Summary of available methods across the methods given the sample size and ratio between the exposure-mediator and mediator-outcome association. In our case, the sample size is 1978, and the ratio is 1.76. The simulation study suggests that the product-of-coeﬃcients method performs the best for a continuous mediator in terms of bias and variance. However, this superior performance of the product-of-coeﬃcients method is due to its modeling assumption that no other nonlinear terms are allowed except for the exposure-mediator interaction. If other nonlinear terms are modeled in the mediator or outcome model, one should consider using one of the imputation methods. Given the sample size and the ratio, both the single-mediator-imputation and the multiple-mediator-imputation methods are expected to work well. mediator’s case for illustration by dichotomizing mediator by its median. Given the same condition as before, the following methods are available: product-of-coeﬃcients, RMPW, single-mediator-imputation, and multiple-mediator-imputation (2, 3, 4, and 5 from Table 3). The ratio is 0.17 after dichotomizing the mediator. Given this ratio, the simulation study suggests that the product-of-coeﬃcients (using the alternative estimator for disparity remaining) and the imputation methods should work well. If investigators are willing to Although the mediator (childhood abuse) is continuous, we consider a binary assume no other nonlinear terms except for the exposure-mediator interaction, the product-of-coeﬃcients method should be considered. If other nonlinear terms are modeled, the imputation methods should be considered. While the RMPW method is also an available option, caution is required as the conﬁdence interval obtained from nonparametric bootstraps may be narrower than expected for a ratio less than 1. be reduced if we decrease discrimination and increase education for Black women to the level of White men. The mediators are discrimination (standardized mean = ≠0.01, SD =0.99) and education (mean =7.72, SD =2.53), and the outcome is CVH. We model diﬀerential eﬀects of discrimination (interaction between R and M Although the interaction eﬀect is not signiﬁcant in our sample, the diﬀerential eﬀect of discrimination by race and gender is known from previous literature (Bey et al., 2019). The only available method for multiple mediators is the multiple-mediator-imputation method. Summary of Findings estimation methods are shown in Table 4. We begin by noting that the initial disparity for Black women compared to White men is ·(1, 0) = ≠0.97, with the conﬁdence interval bounded away from zero, which means that Black women’s CVH is worse (unhealthier) than White men among those who have the average level of age and genetic vulnerability. The initial disparity is slightly smaller for the regression-based method (·(1, 0) = ≠0.93). Once the disparity is observed, social scientists would also want to know how to reduce the disparity, for example, by reducing Black women’s exposure to childhood abuse to the level of White men. intervening on childhood abuse. The estimand ” Estimator 2) and ≠0.12 (for using Estimator 4 or 5) and the conﬁdence intervals (for using For intervention 2, our research question is to what extent the CVH disparity would The estimates for disparity reduction and remaining obtained from diﬀerent The ﬁrst bracket of Table 4 shows disparity reduction and remaining due to all three estimators) cover zero. Given the assumptions, this means that the CVH disparity between Black women and White men won’t be signiﬁcantly reduced even if we intervene to decrease Black women’s childhood abuse to the level of White men. mediator (childhood abuse) was binary. The estimand ” (Estimator 2) and ≠0.09 (Estimator 4), and the conﬁdence intervals cover zero. The interpretation for ” that compared to the conﬁdence interval (CI = ≠0.147, ≠0.026) of the disparity reduction for the product-of-coeﬃcients method, the CI from the weighting method (≠0.042, ≠0.048) is narrower while the CI from the single-mediator-imputation method (≠0.216, ≠0.051) is wider. This result is consistent with the simulation result when the ratio is less than 1. intervening on education and perceived discrimination simultaneously. According to the multiple-mediator-imputation method, disparity reduction is ” conﬁdence interval bounded away from zero. This implies that CVH disparity between Black women and White men will be signiﬁcantly reduced if we intervene to decrease discrimination and increase education for Black women to the level of White men. The percentage reduction due to this intervention is 54.3%. Yet, it is important to note that a diﬀerent conclusion could be derived depending on estimation methods, particularly when a sample size is small or the exposure-mediator association is smaller than the mediator-outcome association. decomposition analysis. Unlike causal mediation analysis based on natural indirect eﬀects The second bracket of Table 4 shows disparity reduction and remaining when the The third bracket of Table 4 shows disparity reduction and remaining due to In this example, the same conclusion is derived from diﬀerent estimation methods. Estimation of disparity reduction/remaining is an important topic in causal Table 4 Estimates of the disparity reduction and disparity remaining for Black women vs. White men Initial disparity (· Disparity remaining (’ Disparity reduction (” Initial disparity (· Disparity remaining (’ Disparity reduction (” Initial disparity (· Disparity remaining (’ Disparity reduction (” 3: RMPW estimator; 4: Single-mediator-imputation estimator; 5: multiple-mediatorimputation estimator. 2) R◊M: Diﬀerential eﬀects of a mediator by groups. 3) CI = conﬁdence interval. 4) Baseline covariates are mean-centered. (Pearl, 2009; VanderWeele, 2010b), causal decomposition analysis allows intermediate confounding, which is a substantial advantage considering that no intermediate confounding is a strong assumption that is hard to be met in many empirical settings. However, allowing intermediate confounders adds a modeling burden, since the identiﬁcation result for disparity reduction/remaining depends on the distribution of intermediate confounders. Therefore, it is important to develop an estimation method that reduces the modeling burden while maintaining good performance in terms of bias and eﬃciency. Our newly developed product-of-coeﬃcients estimator is ﬂexible enough to address a categorical mediator and interaction term between the exposure and mediator. Another single-mediator-imputation estimator is ﬂexible to address a categorical mediator/outcome and any nonlinear terms. Both estimators require modeling a mediator and an outcome (additionally modeling confounders for the product-of-coeﬃcient estimator with a binary mediator). The product-of-coeﬃcients estimator performs the best assuming no other nonlinear terms, except for the exposure-mediator interaction. results diﬀer when using diﬀerent methods. Examining the performance of estimation methods through simulation studies provides helpful information. With a large sample size (n Ø 1000) and a high ratio of the exposure-mediator association to the mediator-outcome association (r Ø 2), all estimators perform well in terms of bias, RMSE, and coverage rate with either a binary or continuous mediator. Their performance does diﬀer, however, with smaller sample sizes or a ratio that is less than 2. A low coverage rate of the weighting method obtained from nonparametric bootstraps with ratios less than 1 is particularly worrisome since it could inﬂate the type I error rate. An alternative way to calculate correct standard errors, such as that shown in Bein et al. (2018), may be necessary. It is also noteworthy that the single-mediator-imputation method provides a high coverage rate for a continuous mediator when the ratio is less than 2. Given research questions and data, investigators can use this information in choosing an optimal method for their study. It is of substantive interest in choosing an optimal estimation method when the exposure-mediator and mediator-outcome association. An estimator relying heavily on modeling a mediator (such as RMPW or single-mediation-imputation) performs poorly when the exposure-mediator association is weaker than the mediator-outcome association. In contrast, the multiple-mediator-imputation relies on modeling confounders, and thus the performance does not depend on the ratio. The product-of-coeﬃcient estimator relies on modeling a mediator but with a strong modeling assumption (i.e., no other nonlinear term other than the exposure-mediator interaction). Given this assumption, the performance of the product-of-coeﬃcient estimator does not depend on the ratio. The ratio has been neglected in many mediation simulation studies. Yet, it appears that the ratio is an important condition to consider when assessing the performances of mediation estimators in future studies. one way of deﬁning disparity reduction/remaining. A diﬀerent deﬁnition of disparity reduction/remaining exist (Jackson, 2019; Jackson & VanderWeele, 2018) and the performance of estimation methods for diﬀerent deﬁnitions is unknown. Therefore, the simulation study can be extended to an alternative deﬁnition of disparity reduction/remaining. In addition, the current study only addresses the issues of estimating disparity reduction/remaining when the identiﬁcation assumptions are met. However, the assumptions are strong, and thus, may not be met in many empirical settings. Therefore, an important future study includes developing a sensitivity analysis to possible violations of the assumptions. One important condition we vary in our simulation study is the ratio between the It is important to note the limitations of the current study. This study only addresses where s œ S,m The ﬁrst equality is due to the law of total probability with respect to S = s. The second equality is due to the law of total probability with respect to M is after incorporating the outcome model. Likewise, Given equations (7) and (8), the disparity reduction can be rewritten as The second equality is after incorporating the mediator model. reduction and remaining sum up to the initial disparity. Alternatively, the disparity remaining can be obtained by additionally modeling the intermediate confounder model. To be more speciﬁc, disparity remaining for intervention 1 is deﬁned as The disparity remaining is estimated as ’(c)=„ ≠ –◊ (—+ —) since disparity where s œ S,m rewritten as where Ÿ proof. E[S|R =0,c]+—E[M|R =0,c]+—c. Given this, the disparity remaining can be is the diﬀerence in S between R =1and R =0given C = c. This completes the where s œ S,m The fourth equality is due to the law of iterated expectation with respect to S and R given C = c. The ﬁfth equality is due to applying P (A, B|c)=P (A|c)P (B|A, c). This completes the proof. Appendix B. A Proof for the Single-mediator-imputation Estimator =I(R = 1)E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (S|R, c)P (m|R =0,c) =E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (S|R, c)P (m|R =0,c)P (R|c) =E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)P (S, R|c) =E[E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)|c] =E[E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)|R =1,c] =E[E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)|R =1,c]. Appendix C. A Proof for the Single-mediator-imputation Estimator (Marginal) where s œ S,m The fourth equality is due to the law of iterated expectation with respect to S, R, and C = c. The ﬁfth equality is due to applying P (A, B)=P (A)P (B|A). This completes the proof. =I(R = 1)E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (S|R, c)P (m|R =0,c)P (c) =E[Y |R , S, m,c]P (S|R, c)P (m|R =0,c)P (R|c)P (c) =E[Y |R , S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)P (S,R,c)(15) =E[E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)] =E[E[Y |R, S, m,c]P (m|R =0,c)|R = 1]