PNNL-31870, doi:10.2172/1826602 This report was prepared by the Nu Tools Executive group: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report A portion of this work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC02-05CH11231. The project was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D). A portion of this work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Brookhaven National Laboratory under contract DE-SC0012704. The project was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science and National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D). A portion of this work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. This research was supported by the Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation R&D (DNN R&D) in the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA). A portion of this research was supported by the Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation R&D (DNN R&D) in the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed and operated by UT-Battelle, LLC. A portion of this work was performed by Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, a contractor of the U.S. Department of Energy, under contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. This research was supported by the Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation R&D (DNN R&D) in the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA). Portions of this work were supported by the U. S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) through the Nuclear Science and Security Consortium under award number DE-NA0003180, the Monitoring, Technology and Veriﬁcation Consortium under award number DE-NA0003920, and the Consortium for Enabling Technologies and Innovation under award number DE-NA0003921, and by the National Science Foundation under award numbers IIP-1924433 and IIP-1941238. Portions of this work were supported by the National Institute of Standards and Technology within the U.S. Department of Commerce. National Laboratory Release Information: BNL-222043-2021-JAAM LLNL-TR-826137 PNNL-31870 Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report 3.3 Neutrino System Siting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4.1 Four Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.2 Division of Expertise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.3 Evaluating Each Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 5.1 Current International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Safeguards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 5.2 Advanced Reactors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 5.3 Future Nuclear Deals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 5.4 Reactor Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 5.5 Non-Cooperative Reactor Monitoring or Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 5.6 Spent Nuclear Fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 5.7 Post-Accident Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 6.1 Recommendation for End-User Engagement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 6.2 Recommendation for Technology Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 For decades, physicists have used neutrinos from nuclear reactors to advance basic science. These pursuits have inspired many ideas for application of neutrino detectors in nuclear energy and security. While developments in neutrino detectors are now making some of these ideas technically feasible, their value in the context of real needs and constraints has been unclear. This report seeks to help focus the picture of where neutrino technology may ﬁnd practical roles in nuclear energy and security. This report is the ﬁnal product of the Nu Tools study, commissioned in 2019 by the DOE National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D). The study was conducted over two years by a group of neutrino physicists and nuclear engineers. A central theme of the study and this report is that useful application of neutrinos will depend not only on advancing physics and technology but also on understanding the needs and constraints of potential end-users. The Study Approach emphasized broad end-user engagement. The major effort, undertaken from May to December 2020, was a series of engagements with the wider nuclear energy and security communities. Interviews with 41 experts revealed points of common understanding, which this report captures in three Cross-Cutting Findings, a Framework for Evaluating Utility, and seven Use Case Findings. The report concludes with two Recommendations. The ﬁndings and recommendations are summarized below. The respective ordering within each category does not represent a prioritization or implied value judgement. Three ﬁndings of this study apply across all potential applications of neutrino technology: End-User Engagement: The neutrino technology R&D community is only beginning to engage attentively with endusers, and further coordinated exchange is necessary to explore and develop potential use cases. Technical Readiness: The incorporation of new technologies into the nuclear energy or security toolbox is a methodical process, requiring a novel system such as a neutrino detector to demonstrate sufﬁcient technical readiness. Neutrino System Siting: Siting of a neutrino-based system requires a balance between intrusiveness concerns and technical considerations, where the latter favor a siting as close as possible. Seven ﬁndings of this study pertain to speciﬁc use cases discussed during conversations with the wider nuclear security and nuclear energy communities. This report evaluates these hypothetical use cases using a common framework consisting of four criteria: the need for a new or improved capability in a particular application space; the existence of a neutrino signal; the availability of a neutrino detection technology; and the compatibility of that technology with end-user implementation constraints including cost, workforce requirements, timelines, and other logistical considerations. The Use Case Findings, presented with full analysis later in the report, are brieﬂy summarized as: Current International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Safeguards: For the vast majority of reactors under current IAEA safeguards, the safeguards community is satisﬁed with the existing toolset and does not see a speciﬁc role for neutrinos. Advanced Reactors: Advanced reactors present novel safeguards challenges which represent possible use cases for neutrino monitoring. Future Nuclear Deals: There is interest in the policy community in neutrino detection as a possible element of future nuclear deals involving cooperative reactor monitoring or verifying the absence of reactor operations. Reactor Operations: Utility of neutrino detectors as a component of instrumentation and control systems at existing reactors would be limited. Non-Cooperative Reactor Monitoring or Discovery: Implementation constraints related to required detector size, dwell time, distance, and backgrounds preclude consideration of neutrino detectors for non-cooperative reactor monitoring or discovery. Spent Nuclear Fuel: Non-destructive assay of dry casks is a capability need which could potentially be met by neutrino technology, whereas long-term geological repositories are unlikely to present a use case. Post-Accident Response: Determining the status of core assemblies and spent fuel is a capability need for postaccident response, but the applicability of neutrino detectors to these applications requires further study. In light of the study ﬁndings, this report makes two recommendations to the sponsor which together present a pathway to practical use of neutrino technology in service of policy needs. The Recommendations, each expanded upon later in the report, are: Recommendation for End-User Engagement: DNN should support engagement between neutrino technology developers and end-users in areas where potential utility has been identiﬁed. Recommendation for Technology Development: DNN should lead a coordinated effort among agencies to support a portfolio of neutrino detector system development for areas of potential utility, principally in future nuclear deals and advanced reactors. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report This report is the ﬁnal product of the Nu Tools study, commissioned in 2019 by the DOE National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D). The study was performed by the Nu Tools Executive Group, a team of neutrino physicists and nuclear engineers from U.S. universities and U.S. government laboratories. DNN R&D charged the group “to facilitate broad engagement with interested communities on the topic of antineutrino irradiation fuel cycle activities,” with a focus on “potential utility of antineutrino detection technologies and required detection capabilities... in the context of existing or potential policy needs” (emphasis from the original charge In response to the sponsor’s request, this report seeks to provide strategic input to guide possible future R&D investments in the DNN R&D portfolio. This public report also seeks to inform the R&D efforts of scientists and engineers interested in neutrino applications. Finally, the report offers members of the nuclear energy and nuclear security communities a perspective on where neutrino technology could eventually have practical value for them. This document does not attempt to provide a comprehensive technical primer or survey of relevant literature. For these, the reader is referred to a recent survey of applications-oriented neutrino technology. technical terms used in the present report. The Nu Tools Executive Group was tasked with evaluating the utility of neutrino detectors in the context of existing or potential nuclear energy or nuclear security needs. The Executive Group recognizes that utility, deﬁned as detector deployment to meet a nuclear energy or nuclear security need, is only one of the many valuable outcomes that a neutrino R&D program might produce. Broader beneﬁts include nuclear workforce development, international cooperation among nuclear agencies, and development of new scientiﬁc knowledge and technical advances. A foundation in utility allows R&D programs to better capitalize on these broader impacts. That is, a neutrino detector pursued for nuclear energy or security applications must be realistically deployable to serve as an effective platform for workforce training and international cooperation. Although the focus of this report is utility, broader beneﬁts are noted throughout the report where possible. With its focus on utility, this study adds practical context to the prior literature on neutrino applications. Most earlier studies have focused on characterizing neutrino signals and possible detection technologies. This study recognizes that utility also depends on the needs and constraints of end-users: reactor designers, inspectors, diplomats, and other specialists. Figure 2.1: Diagram depicting the ﬁelds of specialization of the 41 experts engaged for this study. Interviewees were assigned to each set based on their area of expertise as identiﬁed by the Executive Group. Not represented in the diagram are an additional set of engagements with the neutrino technology development community, conducted via a mini-workshop in July 2020. To collect expert views on practical considerations, the Nu Tools study prioritized broad engagement with relevant communities, as shown in Figure 2.1. Community assessment conducted by members of the Nu Tools Executive Group was performed through semi-structured interviews and a mini-workshop. Interviewees were selected by Executive Group members with an emphasis on experts outside the physics research community, including international and domestic safeguards practitioners, nuclear reactor vendors and operators, and nuclear policy experts with experience in government agencies and non-governmental organizations. Most interviewees were known to Executive Group members through previous contacts. A list of all interviewees is shown in Appendix C. To survey the scientiﬁc community, a mini-workshop was held in July 2020. Specialists in neutrino technology development, including participants in the Applied Antineutrino Physics (AAP) conference series, were invited to provide their assessment of the utility of neutrino technologies for nuclear energy and security. Details about the mini-workshop appear in Appendix D. As background material for the interviews and mini-workshop, the Executive Group developed fact sheets covering a broad overview of potential neutrino applications. The fact sheets appear in Appendix E. These sheets include generalizations of use cases that have been examined in the literature or discussed in the technology development community. Overall, the fact sheets offered an inclusive starting point with context relevant to a variety of potential end-users. The material was largely informed by known physics and conceivable detector technology. The fact sheets Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report covered the following areas: • Reactor power monitoring: determining the presence or absence of a reactor, a change in the reactor state, or • Fissile content tracking: continuously measuring the reactor ﬁssile content, particularly its plutonium inventory. • Non-ﬁssile material transmutation: production of plutonium, tritium, or various industrial or medical isotopes • Irradiated fuel monitoring: veriﬁcation of dry-storage casks, long-term monitoring of geological spent fuel • Post-incident monitoring: detection of criticality in accidents involving fuel damage, containment integrity, or • Regional reactor observation: remote discovery of undeclared nuclear reactors or veriﬁcation of the operation • Scientiﬁc engagement: cooperative efforts to build trust with adversaries, reemploy former weapons scientists, The fact sheets were included with interview invitations, and provided guidance on potential topic areas for discussion as categorized by the Executive Group. However, they served only as conversation starters, and their categorization of use cases does not correspond directly to ﬁndings in this report. Each interviewee also received a set of questions to frame the discussion. The interview questions were designed to illuminate needs and desires of the end-user community and potential implementation constraints. At least two Executive Group members participated in each interview. Accounts of the interviews were documented simultaneously by Executive Group members and later combined into a single account provided to the interviewee for review of accuracy and completeness. Following the May–September 2020 interviews, the Executive Group summarized the major ﬁndings, taking special care to synthesize viewpoints and capture community consensus. The result of this stage of analysis was an interim report provided to DNN R&D. To ﬁll gaps in some topics and clarify unsettled points, more interviewees were identiﬁed and interviewed from September–December 2020. This ﬁnal report builds upon conclusions from the interim report, a review of all interviews, and systematic analysis by the Executive Group. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report tracking the reactor power over time. through nuclear processes other than ﬁssion. repositories, locating reprocessing waste in cleanup efforts, and nuclear archaeology. radiation release. and monitoring of known reactors. and leverage the nuclear security infrastructure to address basic scientiﬁc questions. Engagement between the Nu Tools Executive Group and members of expert communities led to the following three cross-cutting ﬁndings. These ﬁndings apply to all potential use cases for neutrino technology: The neutrino technology R&D community is only beginning to engage attentively with end-users, and further coordinated exchange is necessary to explore and develop potential use cases. Although many experts see some potential in neutrino technologies, they do not see a use case that is compelling enough to justify the adoption of neutrino-based technology at this time. For the most part, potential use cases have been identiﬁed, developed, and discussed within the neutrino physics community. In these studies, the primary focus has been on understanding neutrino signals and developing detection technologies. While these efforts have effectively demonstrated the general features of the technology, this approach has not been successful in establishing enduring connections and credibility with end-users. This has created an impression that neutrino technology developers are advocating for a speciﬁc approach without developing a deep understanding of signiﬁcant real-world goals and constraints, both political and technical, which has limited the exploration of potential use cases with end-users. Generally, experts agree that neutrino technology advocates have not engaged end-users sufﬁciently, nor developed the necessary comprehension of their needs and constraints, to develop a mutual understanding between these groups. Systematic and sustained two-way exchange between interested neutrino physicists and end-user communities is necessary to identify use cases that meet all four criteria presented in the Framework for Evaluating Utility. Interviewees feel that some of this engagement can be effectively conducted in end-user forums such as the Institute of Nuclear Materials Management Annual Meeting. To strengthen credibility with potential end-users, neutrino experts should use these forums to develop a more sophisticated understanding of end-user needs and constraints and clearly communicate current neutrino detector capabilities. These engagements may be enhanced through real-time, two-way discussions of use cases, such as panel discussions at conferences and in dedicated working groups. The incorporation of new technologies into the nuclear energy or security toolbox is a methodical process, requiring a novel system such as a neutrino detector to demonstrate sufﬁcient technical readiness. The political signiﬁcance of safeguards and veriﬁcation calls for robust technologies with unambiguous outputs. High standards of accuracy and reliability also apply to reactor instrumentation. Before incorporating a new technology in any nuclear energy or security system, end-users will require it to have achieved an appropriate Technical Readiness Level (TRL). implementation of neutrino-based measurements, several scenarios are conceivable, e.g.: (1) integration of a neutrino system with a new facility in the design and construction phase, (2) a neutrino system tailored to the constraints presented by an existing facility, and (3) a standardized neutrino system that could be used at various existing facilities (e.g., siting a mobile neutrino system external to a reactor containment building). The speciﬁc scenario and requirements of the end-user will deﬁne the TRL requirements for a neutrino system. End-users may be more willing to consider low-TRL systems in the context of facilities based on new technologies where gaps in safeguards or instrumentation capabilities exist, such as in advanced reactor types still under development. For end-users in the ﬁrst scenario above, particularly in the context of reactor instrumentation, a neutrino system could enter the facility planning process at a relatively low TRL. TRL 4 is sufﬁcient to consider a system as part of a conceptual design review, toring applications, early incorporation of a neutrino system into facility planning would also align with the principle of safeguards-by-design. However, safeguards end-users (e.g., those tasked with verifying reactor operator declarations) would typically expect a technology to have been demonstrated to a TRL of 7 to 8 before incorporation in their planning processes. That is, they seek a full-scale system prototype demonstration in an operationally relevant environment, potentially with rigorous qualiﬁcation tests. In addition to proving the technical qualiﬁcations of the system, such a demonstration would give end-users the necessary experience in operating a neutrino system and interpreting the data it provides. A neutrino system demonstration of this type is likely a requirement prior to consideration of the technology for the second and third scenarios above, and would bolster consideration in the ﬁrst scenario. As a neutrino technology proceeds through successively higher TRLs, end-user input should be an integral part of the process. This input is necessary to deﬁne system requirements in all scenarios identiﬁed above. The end-users— safeguards personnel, reactor designers, and/or reactor operators—will provide necessary inputs for determining required capabilities and implementation constraints. Planning and conducting a demonstration should be viewed as an opportunity for end-users and technology developers to collaboratively advance a promising concept towards ﬁeld readiness. Siting of a neutrino-based system requires a balance between intrusiveness concerns and technical considerations, where the latter favor a siting as close as possible. Interviewees in this study view non-intrusiveness as a key advantage of neutrino-based monitoring approaches. This feature is desirable for all viable use cases considered in this study, including future nuclear deals, advanced reactor safeguards, spent fuel monitoring, and incident response. The concept of intrusiveness includes several aspects when implementing a monitoring technology: concerns that a technology and the physical access required for its installation and operation could cause technical interference or other disruption at a facility, as well as concerns that the technology may reveal sensitive information beyond the monitoring task. Neutrino-based monitoring can assuage intrusiveness concerns, since no connection to facility process components is required to access a neutrino signal. This inherent characteristic of neutrinos provides considerable ﬂexibility in system site-selection and largely eliminates technical interference concerns. The ability to place a neutrino system outside a facility building or even beyond the facility boundary increases deployment ﬂexibility and reduces the potential to disrupt facility operations or to reveal sensitive information. Intrusiveness considerations could lead a cooperatively monitored party to prefer sites far from the reactor of interest. However, a very strong impetus to negotiate the closest possible deployment site derives from implementation constraints related to neutrino detector size, cost, and construction timeline. These constraints follow from the fact that the number of neutrinos reaching a detection system falls as the inverse square of the standoff distance, e.g. the signal rate at 100 m standoff compared to 25 m is diminished by 1/16 inevitably result in a combination of increased system size, cost, and deployment time and/or a reduction in obtainable signal rate. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report As with any detection system, the information content available from neutrinos increases with signal rate and decreases with background rate. In the regime of small signal and high background, it is only possible to determine whether a reactor is on or off. With higher signal and/or lower background rates, a determination of the reactor power becomes feasible. Finally, at high signal rates, it becomes possible to exploit the neutrino spectrum to determine the ﬁssile material content of the reactor. Furthermore, the background rate scales with the detector size (all else being equal) and is approximately independent of standoff, meaning that available information content inevitably degrades at greater distances even faster than the inverse square of the distance. Absent dramatic advances in detection capabilities, the background can only be signiﬁcantly reduced by the addition of shielding material or overburden above a monitoring system to attenuate cosmic ray particles. Adding shielding to an aboveground system is only practical at the scale of a few meters of material and substantially increases the system footprint. At some point with increasing standoff and detector size, underground deployment is necessary to achieve sufﬁcient background suppression. In turn, underground deployment requires signiﬁcant underground excavation and construction. Thus, the transition from surface to underground deployment results in a pronounced increase in system cost, a lack of mobility, and an extension of the construction timeline. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report To assess the potential utility of neutrino detectors in speciﬁc applications, the Executive Group developed a fourcriterion evaluation framework. This framing reﬂects common themes heard in expert interviews across a variety perspectives. A promising use case for neutrino technology fulﬁlls all four criteria: 1. Need for a new or improved capability, 2. Existence of a neutrino signal, 4. Compatibility with implementation constraints. Most previous studies of neutrino applications have implicitly focused on the second and third criteria; that is, they were conducted from the viewpoint of the technology development community. By adding the ﬁrst and fourth criteria, the Nu Tools study adds practical context. Dividing the concept of utility into four parts helps clarify where different types of expertise are relevant. The four criteria in the Nu Tools utility framework are evaluated by two different communities as follows: Neutrino physicists, including most members of the Nu Tools Executive Group, are experts on neutrino signals and detectors (criteria 2 and 3) but not on the needs and constraints of the nuclear energy and security enterprises (criteria 1 and 4). Expertise on needs and constraints resides in the nuclear security and nuclear engineering communities. Accordingly, the experts interviewed in the Nu Tools study provide this report’s perspective on criteria 1 and 4. When assessing a potential application for neutrino technology, the Executive Group considered each criterion in the utility framework: 1. Capability need is expressed by the user community as a desire for speciﬁc detection and/or monitoring capabilities, which either are entirely missing or not as effective as sought. If applicable, the comparison with existing 2. Existence of a neutrino signal is evaluated by the neutrino technology community. The assessment is based 3. Availability of a detector technology is determined by the neutrino technology community. In a hypothetical use 4. Implementation constraints are expressed by the user community. They include cost, workforce requirements As noted above, a potential neutrino application is considered promising only if all four criteria are met or plausibly attainable. The following chapter applies this utility framework to seven hypothetical neutrino use cases. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report technologies factors into the assessment of this criterion. Different stakeholders may have different needs in the same use case. Considering the need for a capability is often tied to consideration of cost/effort associated with it: for some capabilities, there is a cost beyond which they are no longer perceived as needed; conversely, some capabilities have no associated value even at very small cost. Thus, there is a coupling between this criterion and implementation constraints (criterion 4). on well-known physics together with an understanding of the speciﬁc use case, the latter often being only approximate. For instance, reactors produce large numbers of neutrinos when operating, and there are suitable detection reactions. In contrast, uranium enrichment does not produce any neutrino signatures. case, the question is whether it is possible to build a detector sensitive enough to detect the neutrino signature and whether backgrounds can be sufﬁciently suppressed. In assessing the availability of detector technologies, a wide range of technological maturity is considered adequate to meet this criterion, even if signiﬁcant R&D is still required to obtain a system demonstrating a detection. The criterion is not considered satisﬁed if major, unforeseeable breakthroughs in technology or new discoveries in neutrino physics are required. (both in terms of number of personnel and training), timeliness of the measurement, lead time to deployment, and general logistical constraints. They can also include issues of intrusiveness and satisfactory compatibility with an agreement. Consideration of this criterion includes a weighing of the urgency of a capability need versus these constraints. The four-criteria Framework for Evaluating Utility offers a common basis for considering the possible utility of neutrino applications. This chapter applies the framework to seven hypothetical neutrino use cases, each of which received discussion from multiple participants in the Nu Tools engagement sessions. The respective ordering of ﬁndings within each category does not represent a prioritization or implied value judgement. The capability need and implementation constraints sections present a synthesis of the interview comments, consistent with the concept that the end-user communities are best equipped to speak to these criteria. The neutrino signature and detection technology sections come from the technology development communities, again following the Framework for Evaluating Utility. These sections therefore draw more directly from the knowledge of the Nu Tools Executive Group. For conciseness, the sections below present only considerations speciﬁc to each use case that go beyond the general physics of neutrino emission and detection presented in the Nu Tools fact sheets in Appendix E. Readers, especially those new to the ﬁeld of neutrino applications, may ﬁnd it helpful to refer to these Fact Sheets as background. In brief, three major facts about neutrino physics stand behind the discussion below. First, neutrinos are emitted by ﬁssion products in a nuclear reactor (and at a lower level from spent fuel) at a rate proportional to the reactor power; they also carry information about the isotopic content of the fuel. Second, neutrinos rarely interact, which allows them to pass through reactor containment buildings and other surrounding material. This property is the key reason that neutrinos are interesting as a ﬁssion signature in applications, yet it also introduces detection challenges. Third, neutrinos are emitted isotropically from ﬁssion sources, which means their ﬂux falls with an inverse square law with respect to the source-to-detector distance. Together, these facts enable certain possibilities for applications and also give rise to some limitations. A more detailed discussion of neutrino signals and detection technologies, along with a review of several potential nuclear security applications, appears in a recent review. For the vast majority of reactors under current IAEA safeguards, the safeguards community is satisﬁed with the existing toolset and does not see a speciﬁc role for neutrinos. Summary: For declared reactors, the current safeguards approach largely relies on containment, surveillance, and item accountancy, and no capability gaps have been identiﬁed. reactors comes in the form of discrete, countable units. Interest in new technologies is guided by operational ease and time savings without a signiﬁcant increase in cost. Current neutrino detection technologies do not meet these criteria. Neutrinos could provide power and/or fuel burn-up measurements; however, at power reactors, these quantities are typically declared by the operator and are rarely directly measured under safeguards. For research reactors, only reactors with a thermal power over 10 MW are a signiﬁcant concern for plutonium production. set of such reactors where power is measured by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in part through thermohydraulic techniques. Neutrino detectors could perform the same task, but it is unclear that they would provide any beneﬁts over existing tools, particularly given the current cost comparison. In summary, neutrino detectors offer capabilities which are either a more expensive duplicate of existing capabilities, such as power measurements at research reactors, or which have no established role and are not seen as a need in the current IAEA practices, such as in situ burn-up measurements. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Most members of the international community, including the US, maintain a policy interest in safeguarding civilian reactors. The goal is to verify that power and research reactors, especially in non-nuclear weapons states, are not used to produce ﬁssile material for weapons programs. This policy is codiﬁed in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which entered into force in 1970, and is implemented by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Existing reactor safeguards are designed around preventing the diversion of a speciﬁc minimum quantity of ﬁssile material, termed a signiﬁcant quantity (SQ, e.g. 8 kg Pu, 25 kg HEU).Power reactors have a relatively limited and consistent set of operational activities, e.g. receipt and storage of fresh fuel, loading of fuel into the reactor core, transfer of spent fuel to wet storage, and transfer to dry storage. These well-deﬁned activities allow, under standard practice, for safeguarding to be accomplished via item accountancy, i.e. counting material, typically in terms of discrete fuel assembly components, as it enters a reactor and comparing against what is removed. Diversion during the intermediate period is addressed by establishing a continuity of knowledge via seals, camera systems, and other technologies.Such mature veriﬁcation activities are part of a relatively-static paradigm, with evolutionary technology improvements implemented as appropriate. In the context of item accountancy, the IAEA relies heavily on its well-established toolset. All safeguards experts interviewed generally felt that existing technologies and procedures are sufﬁcient, and no capability gaps were identiﬁed. New technologies could provide capabilities beyond those utilized for item accountancy, such as near real-time measurement of reactor power or fuel burn-up. However, given that interviewees felt that the item accountancy approach is sufﬁcient, no interviewees saw a beneﬁt to these additional capabilities, particularly when implementation constraints such as costs are considered. New technologies could also play a role in validating fuel-assembly integrity, but cost and signal concerns are signiﬁcant. Research reactors present special challenges for safeguards. There are currently 222 operating IAEA-classiﬁed research reactors worldwide, with 40 that have thermal powers greater than 10 MW.These reactors have a variety of designs and both ﬂexible missions and operating modes. Beyond preventing diversion of ﬁssile material, safeguarding these reactors for declared activities (e.g. the production of medical isotopes) includes preventing operation of the reactor in ways inconsistent with declared activities to develop capabilities for the production of ﬁssile material. Reactor power monitoring is used to verify declared operation, and in some instances the IAEA uses thermohydraulic power measurements for this purpose.Indeed, there are documented cases of research reactor misuse that were not detected by the IAEA safeguards program.Nonetheless, interviewees generally indicated that this reactor class was not a priority for the IAEA. This was felt to be in part because of the relatively small number of reactors at the upper end of the power range that are suitable for the production of signiﬁcant quantities of plutonium. However, neither the importance of this capability gap, nor the technical requirements to ﬁll it, have been well articulated or agreed to by the safeguards community. Neutrino signatures from operating nuclear reactors have been measured over many decades in a variety of basic science experiments. Possible signatures for safeguards have been discussed in a number of papers catalogued in a recent review.The effect of fuel composition is a softening of the neutrino spectrum and reduction of rate with increasing ﬁssion contribution from plutonium-239. This effect was experimentally observed as early as 1994and most recently has been used to provide a measurement of the uranium-235 and plutonium-239 • Detection technology: • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report ﬁssion neutrino spectra. All currently demonstrated reactor neutrino technologies use organic scintillators (which may either be liquid or solid plastic) coupled to photosensors such as photomultiplier tubes. The detector must produce sufﬁciently bright and fast (nanosecond scale) scintillation pulses to identify the signal using the two time-ordered pulses from the positron and the neutron. Given the nature of this coincidence signal and the low energies of the deposited radiation, the method is subject to backgrounds from radioactive contamination as well as cosmic rays. A representative cost for a demonstration detector designed to operate within 10s of meters of a reactor is currently in the ∼$1M–5M range depending on size; costs could reasonably be expected to come down with commercialization. No detector developed to date has been designed for fully remote operation, but there are no signiﬁcant engineering barriers to doing so. Ton-scale detectors have been constructed within approximately a year for research applications, but this could likely be reduced to several months for a standardized operational design. Conceptually, ton-scale detectors that could be rapidly deployed onsite as needed are feasible. Interviewees generally consider the use of neutrino detection in current IAEA safeguards practice at existing reactor facilities to face signiﬁcant implementation challenges. As noted in the Technical Readiness Finding, incorporating any new technology into safeguards practice is a large and challenging task. Many interviewees noted this in a general sense, as well as speciﬁcally in the context of current IAEA safeguards practice at existing reactor facilities. It was noted that, for a variety of cultural and practical reasons, IAEA is focused on execution. As such, incorporation of new technologies and monitoring concepts, absent a strong capability need, is not an institutional priority. Furthermore, changes in the conceptual approach to monitoring carry a large training and implementation burden, including the possibility that state-level safeguards agreements would need to be amended. Additionally, multiple interviewees noted that the IAEA has a highly constrained budget, and the present equipment outlay for reactor facilities is of order $100k per site over a ﬁve year cycle. Since the capital cost of a neutrino detection system is likely to be at least an order of magnitude higher, these would need to be supported by an external party or the monitored state. While there is precedent for equipment to be provided in this way, the holistic lifecycle cost of a neutrino system, including maintenance, operation, and personnel training, would typically fall to the IAEA. For neutrino monitoring to be cost effective in the context of current safeguards needs and practice, it would have to enable the replacement of existing veriﬁcation technology and, through continuous monitoring, result in demonstrated savings by alleviating the need for onsite physical inspection, thus reducing personnel costs. Finally, several interviewees with policy backgrounds consider neutrino monitoring to require further conceptual development. Questions remain about the sensitivity and reproducibility of neutrino detection and how measurements would be interpreted and used to reach safeguards conclusions. Ease of use and reliability were also raised as concerns that would require considerable systems engineering to address. Advanced reactors present novel safeguards challenges which represent possible use cases for neutrino monitoring. Summary: In contrast to the case of existing reactors, interviewees expressed a need for alternate technical methods to ensure adequate safeguards of some advanced reactor systems and an interest in the potential role of neutrino detectors to meet this need. This represents an R&D opportunity as neutrino detector systems can be developed largely independently of the details of the reactor design. Alternatively, the concept of integrating a neutrino detector in the reactor system design may be attractive for advanced reactors where conventional measures such as item accountancy no longer apply. Detailed studies are needed to understand how these technologies would measure parameters of interest. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: • Detection technology: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report The Department of Energy has expressed a desire to develop the next generation of advanced reactors. These systems must address a variety of challenges, including proliferation concerns. Interviewees report that safeguards approaches for advanced reactors have not yet been fully developed. The issue is timely, given a DOE investment of over $500 million in FY20 alonein support of novel reactors, including $160 million for new reactor demonstration projects,and the recent Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) Final Safety Evaluation Report for a small modular nuclear reactor (SMR). The advanced reactor space encompasses a wide range of technologies and power levels, including microreactors, small modular reactors, molten salt-fueled reactors (MSRs), molten salt-cooled reactors, high temperature pebble bed reactors, and traveling wave reactors.Each of these advanced reactor types deviates in relevant ways from the existing ﬂeet of power reactors currently under international safeguards. Traditional material control and accountability methods may not apply, since these methods depend on countable fuel elements, transparent coolant, and frequent refueling. However, any new safeguards solution needs to cater to reactor design features. For example, it would be challenging to verify a MSR via a bulk measurement, due to temporal and spatial variations in its ﬁssion rates and ﬁssile content during operations. This is especially true if the fuel salts are continuously fed and removed from the core. In contrast, many SMRs will use traditional solid fuel, but they will be part of a complex with multiple modules with more frequent refueling operations. This operations mode will create a desire for fuel inventory veriﬁcation without increased inspection resources. Advanced reactors, depending on their design, can use fast neutron ﬁssion, have signiﬁcantly larger breeding ratios and/or burn higher actinides. Little is know empirically about the precise neutrino yields per ﬁssion in those cases. Theoretical calculations indicate that signal rates and proliferation signatures would follow similar trends as for current reactors, with possible exception of increased plutonium breeding in some cases. Other distinctive design features of advanced reactors, like non-itemized fuel, more or less frequent refueling, and nontransparent coolants do not directly affect neutrino signal generation or propagation, but they could potentially shift the balance toward new relevant safeguards capabilities. Nonetheless, some interviewees reafﬁrmed that the target sensitivity of one signiﬁcant quantity (1 SQ) of ﬁssile material remains relevant. Since the design of neutrino detectors is not highly sensitive to the details of the nuclear reactor core design, it is expected that the current detector concepts could also be applicable to advanced reactors. There are several speciﬁc considerations that apply to advanced reactor monitoring. Monitoring of bulk fuel may require high sensitivity for neutrino detection, which implies high statistics, low backgrounds, and the ability to measure the spectral evolution. For an SMR site with multiple modules, the role of a neutrino-based system may be to verify • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report the power history of individual modules. This could be accomplished using known reactor module-to-detector standoff distances and falloff of the neutrino signal with the inverse square of standoff distance. In particular, the use of two or more detectors would facilitate module identiﬁcation via triangulation as has been demonstrated by multi-detector neutrino experiments at multi-reactor facilities.Studies show that the breeding blankets in advanced reactors may be monitored via coherent elastic neutrino nucleus scattering (CEvNS) detectors in the future,but the CEvNS technology has not reached the performance needed to monitor nuclear reactors to date. It was noted by many interviewees that advanced reactors are an emerging technology, and developers are for the most part currently focused on the safety and security of their designs. As such, implementation of safeguards methods is not fully understood and speciﬁc requirements for potential neutrino-based methods have yet to be determined. As noted in the capability need section above, a safeguards method and therefore its deployment can vary depending on the reactor design, not all of which can be covered here. Nonetheless, there were several general observations about the potential implementation of neutrino detectors to advanced reactors systems that were noted by interviewees, many of which are common to other ﬁndings in this report. The cost of neutrino systems, relative to conventional safeguards approaches, was a common concern amongst interviewees. The Current IAEA Safeguards Finding provides a full description of such concerns relative to existing safeguards practice and budgetary constraints. However, some important differences for advanced reactors were noted by several interviewees. First, safeguards techniques have not been fully developed for all proposed advanced reactor types, so comparing development, implementation and operational costs is difﬁcult. Neutrino-based approaches may be cost competitive if considered early in the development cycle, where they would not be displacing installed equipment and established procedures; this concept is typically referred to as safeguards-by-design.Additionally, other considerations for reactor developers may make the adoption of neutrino-based approaches attractive. For example, safeguards concerns and associated export regulations may differ for sales to utilities in the U.S. vs. other nations. The inclusion of additional safeguards systems to provide additional transparency and reassurance of an operator’s intent, like one based on neutrinos, might be advantageous or even necessary to allow advanced reactors to be marketed internationally. Similar to other ﬁndings, concerns were also expressed over the physical implementation of neutrino systems with the primary considerations being size and safety. Once again, the possibility to consider neutrino systems relatively early in the reactor development cycle is a difference compared to other ﬁndings. The same consideration applies to questions about technical readiness, where addressing requirements for safeguarding advanced reactors could be an integral part of a future neutrino system demonstration. It was noted that the similarity of the neutrino signal across the diverse range of advanced reactor types was an attractive feature, since a single system design could have broad applicability. There is interest in the policy community in neutrino detection as a possible element of future nuclear deals involving cooperative reactor monitoring or verifying the absence of reactor operations. Summary: Neutrino detection is viewed by some experts as warranting further consideration in the context of new treaties and agreements, especially those involving a small number of countries. Veriﬁcation of new agreements may require novel capabilities. Constraints on veriﬁcation approaches in a new treaty involving relatively few parties may be less rigid and more open to negotiation compared to those of a large established treaty like the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Agreements with relatively limited scope and a foundation in mutual conﬁdence building are more amenable to the introduction of novel veriﬁcation technologies. Examples that have been studied previously and/or mentioned during engagements include: fuel disposition treaties in which neutrino detectors could verify fuel burn-up and/or the absence of a plutonium-breeding blanket in a plutonium-burning reactor; a future nuclear agreement in which neutrino detectors could be an area of civil nuclear cooperation, and/or monitoring any future reactor operations; a possible nuclear material treaty in which neutrino detectors could verify core isotopics of reactors fueld with high enriched uranium. Accessing information relevant to these agreements would likely call for a facility-speciﬁc deployment. Furthermore, the possibility of combining veriﬁcation functions with scientiﬁc cooperation between participating nations was highlighted as an attractive possibility by some experts. Nonetheless, as highlighted in the Technical Readiness Finding, adding to the negotiating diplomats’ “tool box” depends on a clear understanding of capabilities and deployment requirements. In the case of the recent U.S.-Russia Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement (PMDA)and Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), technical veriﬁcation techniques already established within the IAEA have served as the default due to their well-understood capabilities and implementation pathways. Further work, up to and including a system-level demonstration, is required for neutrino detection to reach sufﬁcient technical readiness to be considered for future agreements. • Capability need: • Neutrino signal: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Interviewees expect that the U.S. will continue to seek agreements regarding nonproliferation and arms control, building on the NPT and past negotiations in particular regions. Some of these new agreements may cover plutonium-production reactors, among other weapons production facilities. Any new agreements pertaining to these activities would almost certainly include technical veriﬁcation measures. Interviewees expressed interest in new veriﬁcation options that would expand the toolset of future negotiators. In particular, several interviewees expressed interest in new technologies that could verify the shutdown of a plutonium production reactor or monitor the status of a reactor of interest. Currently available approaches include satellite imaging of site activity and heat emission as well as onsite inspections by the IAEA.A technology combining the precision of onsite inspections and the non-intrusiveness and persistence of satellite imaging would represent a new “tool in the toolbox” for negotiators, provided it met the implementation constraints discussed below. Technical veriﬁcation measures that could be deployed before or after a comprehensive onsite inspection were noted as potentially valuable. Some interviewees expressed interest in a capability to exclude the presence of an underground reactor, which may lack a visible heat signature, at a site of interest. Beyond veriﬁcation needs, many interviewees discussed the value of scientiﬁc exchange or technical cooperation as a component of future nuclear agreements. Cooperative technical projects in the JCPOA and past U.S.-Russia arms control efforts were cited as historical precedents.Interviewees indicated that this type of engagement can increase the transparency of veriﬁcation efforts and present pathways to redirect scientists from a weapons program to other work. In some countries, building general scientiﬁc and safeguards capacity may also be seen as a beneﬁt of nuclear agreements with cooperative veriﬁcation projects. Neutrinos are produced in proportion to the number of ﬁssions in a reactor, and their energy spectrum depends on the ﬁssile material mixture. Neutrinos propagate in straight lines and cannot be shielded. For this reason, • Detection technology: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report the neutrino signal is no different whether a reactor is above or below ground; only the distance from reactor to detector matters, with ﬂux dropping as the inverse square of the distance. The detail that can be extracted from neutrino measurements about a reactor depends on the total number of detected neutrinos, and thus, for a reasonable size detector, decreases with increasing standoff. This decrease is accelerated by the presence of backgrounds from various sources. Three neutrino detector deployment ranges can be distinguished in terms of the information they are likely to provide: outside of the reactor building but inside the facility perimeter, at a speciﬁc site but outside of the facility perimeter, and the monitoring of any facility within a region. In the ﬁrst, outside of the reactor building but inside the facility perimeter (∼100 m, ∼1 ton-10 ton detector), a neutrino system can deliver a measurement of reactor power, ﬁssile core content, fuel burn-up and potentially fuel enrichment.Furthermore, a neutrino system would maintain or enable recovery of continuity of knowledge should it be lost. For MOX fuel, a distinction between weapons-grade and reactor-grade plutonium appears feasible.For breeder reactors, the use of coherent elastic neutrino nucleus scattering (CEvNS) may in the future allow the detection of a breeding blanket (for both uranium and thorium fuel cycles).In the second range, at a speciﬁc facility but outside of the facility perimeter (∼1,000 m, ∼10 ton-100 ton detector), a measurement of reactor power and thus a limit on plutonium production is possible. Conversely, a shutdown of a reactor can be veriﬁed.At those standoffs, an underground deployment will become necessary to suppress cosmic ray induced backgrounds to an acceptable level. In the third case, monitoring of any facility within a region (∼10,000 m, ∼100 ton-1000 ton detector), the presence of any reactor operation above a certain power level can be detected or excluded.These ranges roughly correspond to differing levels of intrusiveness or access. As noted above, technology selection for use in a future nuclear deal will depend on many factors, including the information needed for veriﬁcation and implementation constraints like cost and allowable deployment site. A number of neutrino physics experiments and detection demonstrations provide real-world examples of possible technology options. For use cases requiring precise neutrino rate and/or spectrum information, siting close to the reactor will be necessary. In the fortunate event of a shallow underground site being available at such close range, ton-scale scintillator detectors without signiﬁcant internal segmentation have demonstrated good performance.In the more likely event of a surface site being the only option, ton-scale segmented scintillator systems that incorporate a neutron capture agent for inverse beta decay identiﬁcation have recently demonstrated neutrino detection. Should a use case require detector siting at greater standoff, underground deployment becomes necessary to suppress background. At distances of ∼100 m-1,000 m, three experiments have demonstrated high performance single volume scintillator detectors at the 10 ton-20 ton scale.When operated ∼50 m-100 m underground • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report these systems had good sensitivity, being able to measure rate and spectrum a few 100 m from large power reactor complexes. Several efforts have demonstrated or plan larger detectors that provide sensitivity to reactor neutrinos at greater distances. These ∼1000 ton systems must be operated deep underground (100 m or more) and use scintillator, water doped with a neutron capture agent,or water-based liquid scintilator (WbLS). CEvNS of reactor neutrinos has been suggested as an alternate detection method, speciﬁcally because it is sensitive to low energies that are invisible to inverse beta decay. While no system that can identify the low energy signal from this reaction over background has yet been demonstrated, research and development on several technologies are underway in a basic science context. The inclusion of neutrino technology in any future nuclear deal will require that a demonstrated solution be well-established in the negotiators’ toolset. Such a solution would be viable for consideration only after a high degree of ﬁeld testing and a performance record that exhibits a false-positive rate commensurate with the stakes of maintaining compliance. The technology development costs to meet this threshold are signiﬁcant and would likely be borne by nations rather than international institutions. Additional concerns about operation and maintenance costs remain a signiﬁcant impediment for the consideration of neutrino detectors. Many of the reasons neutrino solutions are attractive are also the sources of new challenges and concerns to participants of future nuclear deals. A major concern is political acceptability given the novelty of the technology. Participants may have concerns that a neutrino instrument could be revealing information on activities beyond those of the scope of the agreement. Such concerns and the role of open scientiﬁc collaborations would have to be covered by future agreements. Considerations discussed in the Neutrino System Siting Finding favor system siting as close as reasonably achievable to an individual reactor facility of interest. Concepts for exclusion or aggregate monitoring by a single detector of reactor operations at known facilities over a local area with linear dimensions ∼10 km may shift these considerations. Such an approach would have to be motivated by political factors such as mutual conﬁdence building. While a handful of interviewees expressed interest in such concepts, concerns over large costs were common. Utility of neutrino detectors as a component of instrumentation and control systems at existing reactors would be limited. Summary: Experience with current reactor designs spans nearly eight decades and has yielded a mature suite of instrumentation to guide operators, both in safety-related functions and overall performance monitoring. Neutrino detection rates imply that the time required to determine a change in reactor state is long compared to what is needed for safety-critical instrumentation. For these reasons, no role is seen for neutrinos as part of the operational infrastructure. While neutrinos could provide cross calibration of instrumentation subject to harsh environments, e.g. a re-calibration reference for Boiling Water Reactors (BWR), no detailed studies of this potential capability have been performed to date. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: • Detection technology: • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Safe and efﬁcient reactor operations require knowledge of the reactor power, core neutron ﬂux, and other parameters, on the second to minute timescale. In existing power reactors, these quantities are determined using a complex suite of instrumentation in and outside the reactor core. Instruments used in water-cooled reactors include coolant temperature sensors and neutron detectors with designs that have been optimized over decades of reactor operations. In contrast to other ﬁndings, the primary end-user is the nuclear industry and not the safeguards community. Interviewees report that the nuclear industry is generally satisﬁed with the instrumentation available for existing reactors. The ability to maintain continuity of knowledge during a safety event would be valuable,but no speciﬁc scenario relevant to neutrinos and not already covered by existing systems was identiﬁed. The typical neutrino signal rate described in Appendix E corresponds to an interaction rate of about 1 interaction per minute per gigawatt in 1 ton of detector at a standoff of 25 m. That is, a neutrino system will need at least 10s of minutes to respond to a change in reactor conditions and thus, is precluded from being a part of the safety related instrumentation at a reactor. With sufﬁcient integration time, on the order of weeks to months, neutrino measurements of reactor power at the percent level or better seem feasible and thus neutrino signals could be used to absolutely calibrate less accessible instrumentation. Further study would be needed to assess the usefulness of this concept. Neutrino detection technology that could in principle be relevant to reactor operations is similar to that described in the Current IAEA Safeguards Finding and the Advanced Reactors Finding. The low neutrino cross section limits the interaction rate and results in a relatively slow response time from existing neutrino detectors. This is seen as too limiting for instrumentation and control applications, which typically require measurement and control feedback on the second to minute timescale. No path has been identiﬁed in neutrino detection technology development that would fundamentally alter this characteristic. As with other ﬁndings, cost considerations were often mentioned by interviewees as an implementation concern with respect to the use of neutrino-based instrumentation for existing reactor types. However, in this case there were divergent views, with one interviewee deeming a $1M-scale detector reasonable if it were to provide economic beneﬁts to operators, while another discussed severe budget constraints for instrumentation. The need to maximize signal necessitates locating a system as close as possible to, or within, a facility. As discussed in other ﬁndings, conforming with safety and security regulations at existing facilities thus will yield important implementation constraints. All currently demonstrated reactor neutrino technologies use combustible organic scintillators, with many also incorporating combustible hydrogenous shielding materials. Standard ignition mitigation techniques like ﬁre-proof skins or blankets have been used in demonstrations to date to address Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report regulatory requirements when deploying within combustible exclusion areas in reactor facilities. Demonstrations have often used liquid organic scintillators. Use of liquids at the ton-scale requires engineering solutions to comply with spill-control regulations. Modern high-ﬂash point liquid scintillators have largely addressed ﬂammability concerns, but use of liquid still carries a negative perception with some interviewees. Solid plasticbased systems would address such concerns and ease deployability, but to date have not matched the performance of liquid-based systems. Another regulatory concern results from the complexity of neutrino instruments. As noted for the detection technology criterion, the limited interaction rate of neutrinos would preclude their use for safety critical instrumentation. This consideration also involves implementation constraints since the achievable detection rate is strongly related to system location and size. Since implementation of a neutrinobased system will have to adapt to the layout of an existing facility, these system parameters will be constrained, limiting ﬂexibility in the design process if trying to meet a detection rate requirement. Lastly, multiple interviewees noted that the use of neutrino-based instrumentation at multi-reactor facilities would require techniques to disambiguate the signal from each core. Further conceptual development of system implementation would be required to address comments of this nature, in addition to detector R&D. Implementation constraints related to required detector size, dwell time, distance, and backgrounds preclude consideration of neutrino detectors for non-cooperative reactor monitoring or discovery. Summary: In principle, neutrino detectors can monitor known or discover clandestine reactors from beyond the borders of a country of interest without the cooperation of that country’s government. Some experts ﬁnd these intelligence-gathering capabilities attractive as a part of national technical means, in order to monitor states that do not grant access to international inspectors. Others believe there is no real capability need, given the coverage of existing national technical means, chieﬂy satellites. Experts agree that the practical challenges of long-range non-cooperative reactor neutrino monitoring outweigh whatever hypothetical beneﬁt they may provide. The key constraint for far-ﬁeld monitoring is detector size. Because neutrino signal strength drops with the square of standoff distance, very large detectors are required to obtain sufﬁcient neutrino signal for reactor detection at long range. Large detector size confronts multiple severe constraints in the end-user community, including construction and operation costs, construction timeline, and the potential concerns associated with a country conspicuously monitoring its neighbor. Together, these practical constraints preclude any realistic possibility of non-cooperative, long-range reactor monitoring. Close-range monitoring, with either a mobile or stationary system, would require cooperation of the host country because the required detector mass and dwell time are not compatible with a covert operation. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report The capability to observe nuclear facility operations over large regions without local facility cooperation is an attractive intelligence capability to many survey interviewees. Measurement capabilities that can augment facility and reactor declarations of activity through all phases of a project can be valuable. In particular, the detection of small-scale, intentionally-hidden production reactors is often discussed as a highly-motivated capability target for neutrino detectors. Knowledge of such programs is generally obtained through ﬂexible monitoring methods (such as satellites) that can observe a variety of activities associated with the build up to an operational nuclear program. That is, unlike neutrino detectors, they have the potential to provide necessary information well prior to a reactor becoming operational. Non-cooperative reactor monitoring faces a fundamental constraint from the weakness of neutrino interactions. One deployment mode possible without the cooperation by the host country is siting outside of the country, implying standoff distances of 100s of kilometers or more. The neutrino signal drops like the inverse squared distance, so at 100 km distance the signal rate will be 1/10,000 of what it is at 1 km. Therefore, detector size goes from the 10s of ton range into the 100s of kiloton (100,000s of ton) range even in the absence of backgrounds. On top of the fundamental limit imposed by the weakly interacting signal, backgrounds further increase the detector size and deployment complexity for non-cooperative concepts. For a detector at 100 m standoff, the presence of even moderate backgroundsraises the threshold for a useful signal to 30,000 kg-days. For a beyond-border detector, backgrounds from cosmic rays force deployment deep underground. Eventually, neutrinos from other operating reactors in the region become a dominant contributor. The following example illustrates this issue: Europe has a total installed reactor power of around 250 GWwhich will result in the same neutrino signal as one 100 MWreactor at a 50 times larger distance, e.g. for a standoff of 100 km from the reactor of interest even reactors as far as 5,000 km from Europe will have to contend with the resulting background. Reactor backgrounds could be reduced through determination of the neutrino direction on an event-by-event basis. In inverse beta decay, the momentum, and thus the direction of the neutrino, is carried away by the resulting neutron (E' 50 keV). Thus, event-by-event reconstruction of the neutrino direction necessitates neutron momentum reconstruction in a large detector, which is not a current, emerging or even hypothetical capability. In elastic electron-neutrino scattering, the direction information is preserved to a lesser degree, but it is contained entirely in the recoiling electron (E' 4 MeV), which in principle can be tracked even in a large detector. However, the interaction rate per unit detector mass in water is a factor of 5 lower and depends on the achievable detection threshold. Here, ultimately intrinsic radioactive backgrounds from the • Detection technology: • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report detector itself will be the limiting factor. The information contained in the very weak neutrino signal would at best allow an on/off (presence/absence) declaration or an upper limit on time integrated reactor power. The other non-cooperative mode is a close-range covert deployment. To obtain a handful of events at 100 m standoff from a 100 MW reactor, the product of detector mass and dwell time needs to exceed 1,000 kg day. That is, even a perfectly efﬁcient, zero-background, ton-scale (truck-sized) neutrino detector would need to be deployed within 100 m of the reactor core for a full day to collect a few signal events. A variety of technologies capable of detecting neutrinos at short and long range have been demonstrated. However, detecting a sufﬁcient signal in a non-cooperative deployment is a challenge due to the fundamental physics constraints laid out above. For a close-range deployment, the demonstrated near-ﬁeld technology based on segmented scintillator would face the mass and dwell-time issues noted above. For a beyond-border deployment, the low neutrino ﬂux requires large detector volumes to achieve a sufﬁcient neutrino interaction rate. Possible detection media include water, organic scintillator, and water-based scintillator. In water, neutrino interactions are detected via Cherenkov light. By doping the water with a neutron capture agent such as gadolinium a delayed coincidence signature for IBD events is achieved. Such a signature combined with energy and ﬁducial volume requirements can dramatically reduce backgrounds; nevertheless, surface cosmogenic backgrounds are so large that they must be reduced by deep underground deployment. An example of the current state of technology able to detect neutrinos from remote reactors is the Super-Kamiokande detector, which is located approximately 1000 m deep and contains 50 ktons of water in the largest detector tank currently used in a neutrino detector. Non-cooperative use cases involving neutrino detection face severe implementation constraints. These derive from the general consideration of achieving a sufﬁcient signal rate, which as noted above depends on a combination of detector size, background suppression, standoff distance, and dwell time. For non-cooperative operation within the borders of a country, one must consider small, portable detectors, which implies small standoff distance and long dwell time requirements that would be incompatible with a covert deployment. In the case of cross-border, non-cooperative monitoring from the territory of a willing host, interviewees generally agreed that the use of neutrino detection would be impractical, primarily due to the large detector size that would be required. Non-cooperative monitoring or veriﬁcation taking place within the borders of a neighboring country implies a large standoff distance, in turn leading to multi-kiloton scale detectors deployed underground to provide sufﬁcient overburden. A construction project of this scale would be difﬁcult to execute without drawing the attention of the country being monitored, raising questions with respect to a potential escalation of regional tensions. Extended construction projects also provide an opportunity to reconsider the location and operation of reactor facilities. Another implementation consideration arises from the relatively limited fraction of a country’s geographic area that could be monitored in most cases. Information as to the suspected location of an undeclared facility would be needed when choosing the construction site for a large underground neutrino detection system. Alternately, a known facility that one wished to non-cooperatively monitor for veriﬁcation purposes would have to be located conveniently close to a border. Additionally, deﬁning legal mechanisms to facilitate non-cooperative activities would be complex, e.g. the host country would need to agree to construction and surveillance activities over a long time period. Further considering cross-border non-cooperative monitoring at long distances, the system cost for a sufﬁciently large detector and the required underground cavern represent another severe implementation constraint. While some interviewees expressed the view that long distance detection capabilities could in principle be useful, none expressed the view that the utility provided by foreseeable technological implementations justiﬁed the associated cost scale. Non-destructive assay of dry casks is a capability need which could potentially be met by neutrino technology, whereas long-term geological repositories are unlikely to present a use case. Summary: The inventory of spent nuclear fuel in dry cask storage continues to increase globally due to a lack of operational permanent geological repositories in most countries. The current approach to maintain a continuity of knowledge (CoK) with respect to cask contents is based on seals and video surveillance. Interviewees report that no suitable non-destructive assay technology exists despite efforts to develop this capability based on neutron and gamma signatures. Neutrino signatures contain sufﬁcient information for this task, but the neutrino emission from spent fuel is orders of magnitude lower than from an operating reactor, creating strong challenges for detection. Permanent storage of spent nuclear fuel in geological repositories is still under development, and only Finland and Sweden plan to start operations of such a facility within this decade. There is no consensus in the safeguards community on what level of assurance is needed for these facilities after closure, but in general the IAEA requires dual Containment and Surveillance (C&S) with no common failure modes. In principle, neutrino detectors could supplement C&S safeguards for a geological repository, but the low neutrino signal would require such large detectors that it appears unlikely relevant capabilities could be obtained in practice. In summary, non-destructive analysis of dry cask contents is an unmet capability need and relevant neutrino signatures for this task exist, although the detection challenges are formidable. In the case of geological repositories, the detection and implementation challenges likely outweigh the possible monitoring value. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report The safeguarding of spent fuel in dry casks requires maintaining CoK following transport out of the reactor building. In this case, containment and surveillance, especially tags and seals, are used to ensure CoK. As inspection or replacing these seals requires access to the top of casks, there is desire to reduce the physical and radiation risks to inspectors. The high risk and resource requirements associated with opening a previously closed cask gives great importance to visual inspection of the tags and seals. Non-destructive assay (NDA) methods are therefore desired to re-verify cask contents and reduce demands on inspection resources. NDA techniques based on neutrons and gammas have little to no sensitivity to potential diversions of material from the center of the cask due to self-shielding. Any proposed technology should have high reliability, longevity, and provide veriﬁcation independent from declarations. The insufﬁcient performance of neutron and gamma NDA systems has motivated the exploration of new technologies such as muon tomography. These approaches have not yet yielded acceptable solutions, and thus there remains a clear need for additional capabilities. There is no agreed upon general concept of safeguards for geological repositories. The main concern is the content of ﬁssile material. Sweden and Finland will start operations of ﬁnal repositories within the decade, and it appears that in these cases no speciﬁc arrangements for safeguards have been established. Containment and surveillance methods are anticipated to be used, although additional monitoring capabilities are desired. Veriﬁcation of spent fuel inventory requires technology with minimal maintenance needs and the ability to operate over a long timescale. Technologies that have the dual function to ensure environmental and criticality safety of long-term disposal are valued. The neutrino signal from spent nuclear fuel arises from the beta decay of ﬁssion fragments.The rate of neutrino emission from spent fuel is much lower than from an operating reactor because most ﬁssion fragments produced in a reactor have short half-lives, on the order of seconds to minutes. As soon as ﬁssion ceases, the neutrino signal begins to drop precipitously. Five minutes after ﬁssion stops, the emission has dropped by about a factor of 10, after a week it drops by another factor of 10, with continued decreases over the subsequent months and years: after 10 years the rate is down to 10relative to a ﬁssioning system.The only ﬁssion fragment producing a signiﬁcant number of neutrinos above the threshold for inverse beta decay over periods longer than a decade is strontium-90. It has a high (percent level) yield in the ﬁssion of both uranium-235 and plutonium239 and a half-life of 29 years. To date, neutrino detectors have not demonstrated the ability to detect neutrino • Detection technology: • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report emissions from spent nuclear fuel. However, geoneutrinos which fall in the same energy range and present a very low intensity neutrino signal have been detected by two independent experiments.Simulations have predicted that the signal in a 20-ton detector placed within 50 meters of a dry cask storage facility is statistically strong enough within one year to observe the removal of spent fuel from 1 spent fuel cask,not accounting for the likely very sizeable backgrounds close to the surface. The design and construction of detectors for spent fuel will be generally similar to other reactor neutrino detectors. Deployment mode, size and background issues would, however, differ between the spent fuel cask dry storage and geological repository applications. In the case of a dry cask storage facility, the detector would be located above ground or at a shallow underground site (meters of overburden) to either track the movement of fuel casks or to re-verify the contents of a single cask. In this application detector masses of 10-50 ton are appropriate and the challenge is to reduce backgrounds to an acceptable level beyond what has been achieved experimentally.Current operating detectors suggest a segmented design is required. Directional reconstruction of neutrino events would be desirable to reduce backgrounds and increase the sensitivity. For kilometer-scale geological repositories, the detector would be deployed deep underground, on the order of a few hundred meters from the facility, and have a mass in the 100-10,000 ton range. Here, backgrounds would not be an issue and existing neutrino detectors like KamLANDare suitable; however, such a detector would have little sensitivity to anything other than cataclysmic events that impact the entire facility. In order to have statistical sensitivity to anomalies at a relevant level on required timescales, a detector would need to have the capability of crude imaging of the facility. This requires an angular resolution of the order 10 degrees, which can only be achieved by using electron-neutrino scattering. This implies an increase in the detector size to several kilotons. The resulting combination of attributes, large mass and angular resolution, is currently unavailable and difﬁcult to foresee for the future in scintillator detectors. A recent study looks into the use of neutrino-electron scattering in conjunction with a liquid argon time projection chamber.This is a detector technology which could be directionally sensitive and is being developed at a scale of 40,000 tons for the DUNE experiment. The implementation implications of the low signal rate and associated measurement timeline for relatively weak spent fuel sources yielded mixed responses from interviewees. One interviewee expressed concerns about the sensitivity to storage containers with older fuels, while another interviewee discussed the low rate in which casks are received in some facilities, which would tolerate a longer detection time. Further concerns and requirements regarding sensitivity were also expressed. For neutrino detectors to replace existing veriﬁcation technology, they need to meet high sensitivity standards, such as detecting a discrepancy of one signiﬁcant quantity of material in certain scenarios or verifying a 50 metric-ton inventory of fuel to 10% precision. For fuel storage applications, concern was expressed that using neutrino detectors would require changes in standard procedures, in particular moving fuel casks to an emplaced detector system. Similar to other ﬁndings, concerns were expressed about the general timeline associated with adopting new technologies, speciﬁcally by the IAEA. For domestic safeguards of fuel storage and geological repositories experimental validation would be required by an industrial partner who manufactures dry casks, as well as certiﬁcation of use for periods of time counted in decades. Neither liquid scintillator nor liquid argon based neutrino detectors have been operated for these timescales; while operating they do require access for maintenance. In addition to the time to implement and validate a new technology, existing facilities would need to be retroﬁtted to house additional instrumentation. It was pointed out that requirements for robustness, longevity, and environ- Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report mental safety will be more stringent for geological repositories that are located below the water table. As noted in multiple ﬁndings, cost is a concern for implementing neutrino detection. For fuel storage repositories, there were divergent viewpoints on whether neutrino system cost would be reasonable or too high. In the context of fuel storage applications, it was noted that the cost of conventional nuclear detectors, such as multiplicity counters, can approach $1M, but also that the low signal strength may require large and therefore even more costly neutrino detectors. As in other Findings, multiple interviewees discussed the limited IAEA safeguards budget and their inability to support procurement of items in this cost range. Determining the status of core assemblies and spent fuel is a capability need for post-accident response, but the applicability of neutrino detectors to these applications requires further study. Summary: During the nuclear power accidents at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima Daiichi, the initial response aiming to stabilize the facilities and protect the public was hampered by signiﬁcant information gaps. In particular, responders lacked continuous knowledge of the fuel’s physical location, conﬁguration, and criticality status long after the accident. Multiple interviewees pointed out that, despite considerable investment, there remains a need for instruments capable of determining the location and conﬁguration of ﬁssile material in a wide range of post-accident scenarios. Neutrino detection could in principle play a role in a providing an indicator of ongoing ﬁssion reactions. However, much is currently unknown about the performance requirements a neutrino detector would have to meet for this use case. Requirements for ﬁssion power sensitivity would likely be more stringent than presently demonstrated. A detector would need to operate in a challenging post-accident environment, including possible radiation ﬁelds and limited access to power sources. Additionally, it is not clear which stakeholders among governmental agencies, industry associations, reactor vendors, and reactor operators would adopt the responsibility of supporting R&D of this type. Further expert engagement will be required to understand response sensitivity requirements and reasonable parameters deﬁning potential operating environments. The technical feasibility of appropriate detection technology could then be assessed. • Capability need: • Neutrino signature: • Detection technology: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Reactors are designed with a “defense in depth" strategy that accounts for the potential of multiple simultaneous failure modes to prevent any accident from resulting in radiation release. However, in the case of a reactorrelated incident, a portion of an appropriate response requires basic knowledge of the core condition. The three most signiﬁcant global accidents, Three Mile Island (1979), Chernobyl (1986), and Fukushima Daiichi (2011), identiﬁed information gaps in technical parameters associated with the core state following an incident. In cases where core melting might have occurred, it is necessary to know the location, quantity, and conﬁguration of melted fuel. Information about the core is needed to understand both the immediate criticality status and the potential for future changes. While there exists a suite of tools for detecting criticality, e.g. gamma radiation, neutron radiation, and volatile ﬁssion daughters, in the incident at the Fukushima Daiichi plant signiﬁcant damage to existing instrumentation and radiation-restricted access limited available data. Radiation levels were high enough in key locations that instrumentation sent in after the event was rendered inoperable. As a result, even after ten years, there is still a lack of quantitative knowledge of the situation with the cores in units 1, 2, and 3. Furthermore, the situation can be dynamic; radiation ﬂare-ups identiﬁed by instrumentation have occurred well after the Fukushima incident. It remains a challenge to determine if these result from shifting of bulk material (i.e. changes in shielding) or changes in the criticality of core material. Some interviewees suggested that there could be post-accident scenarios where the condition of spent fuel would be a concern. In a post-accident scenario, the ﬁssion rate in the reactor core will likely be much lower than during normal operation. While the neutrino emission rate cannot be predicted in advance since it will strongly depend on the accident scenario, residual neutrino emissions from previously irradiated fuel provide a lower bound.A damaged core may present a sizeable neutrino source for days to weeks after ﬁssion has ceased. Neutrino propagation from source to detector is unaffected by intervening material and thus could represent an attractive signal in cases of bulk material shifting. At this time the conditions that deﬁne post-accident scenarios have not been studied, and as a result, there is limited understanding of the magnitude of the neutrino signal that would have to be detected. Assessment of the sensitivity of neutrino detection to post-accident conditions and the selection of appropriate technologies await • Implementation constraints: Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report better deﬁnition of the signal source term. The harsh radiation environment inherent to many post-accident scenarios is likely to require additional shielding and/or background rejection capabilities. Multiple interviewees commented that a neutrino-based system would need to be compact, transportable, and robust against a possibly harsh radiation environment to meet the implementation constraints of a post-accident nuclear reactor scenario. An alternative implementation is to locate the detector permanently on site, although this strategy would require integration with facility design and may have physical deployment constraints. Although the performance requirements on post-accident diagnostics are as yet poorly deﬁned, interviewees consistently called for autonomous systems, likely with power access, that could be deployed close to the reactor site. Additionally, as noted in the Reactor Operations Finding, the dwell time is an important implementation consideration given the likelihood of a low signal rate. Post-Accident scenarios can be dynamic, and reliable information, based on a sufﬁciently large dataset, may be needed on short timescales. This consideration is in obvious tension with the desire for a compact system. On the basis of the study Findings, the Nu Tools Executive Group makes the following pair of recommendations to the study sponsor, DNN R&D. Pursued concurrently, cooperatively, and with equal priority, the recommended actions present a pathway to applying the capabilities of neutrino technology in service of nuclear energy or security needs. The recommendations have equal priority. They reﬂect the Use Case Findings, which indicate that the areas with the most potential utility for neutrino detectors are Future Nuclear Deals and Advanced Reactors, along with possibilities for further study in Post-Accident Response and Spent Nuclear Fuel. Consistent with the Cross-Cutting Findings and four-part Framework for Evaluating Utility developed in the Nu Tools study, the recommended actions drive toward a meeting point between the needs and constraints of the nuclear energy and security communities and the capabilities offered by neutrino physics and technology. The Nu Tools Executive Committee recommends that DNN R&D pursue both recommendations simultaneously in future investments. DNN should support engagement between neutrino technology developers and end-users in areas where potential utility has been identiﬁed. DNN R&D should allocate and consistently provide appropriate resources for technology developers and end-users to establish and maintain a dialogue. This can be accomplished by supporting speciﬁcally charged working groups, establishing targeted topical meetings, and supporting attendance of well-established meetings such as the Institute of Nuclear Materials Management Meetings and American Nuclear Society Meetings. DNN R&D should provide targeted support to conduct modeling and simulation studies that will evaluate potential performance of neutrino detectors in speciﬁc use cases, including advanced reactors, future nuclear deals, and the less-developed use cases of post-incident response and spent nuclear fuel monitoring. DNN R&D should encourage the inclusion of appropriate technical experts outside of the neutrino detection community in these studies to ensure they have high relevance to end-users. The four-criteria framework developed in this study serves as a useful tool to structure the exchange between the technology development and end-user communities; DNN R&D should encourage its adoption in program planning and evaluation. DNN R&D should lead a coordinated effort among agencies to support a portfolio of neutrino detector system development for areas of potential utility, principally for future nuclear deals and advanced reactors. A key determination from this study is that communication and coordination across agencies and stakeholders is needed to establish technical approaches that address realistic use cases. Neutrino system development within DNN R&D would be enhanced by drawing on relevant technical and project execution expertise found in communities supported by basic science agencies. Communities with expertise in the most promising utility areas should also be involved in deﬁning speciﬁc needs as technology matures and approaches a demonstration stage. DNN R&D should take the lead in this coordination, since it is the most signiﬁcant stakeholder in neutrino technologies for nuclear energy and security applications. A coordinated effort led by DNN R&D to develop and demonstrate a neutrino system at appropriately high TRL in an application-relevant context is a necessary step to bridge the gap between R&D and actual adoption by endusers. To succeed in this goal, support for neutrino signature prediction and calibration must be included alongside that for detector development. Since it takes an extended period of time to transition a technology to higher TRLs, coordination and research funding should proceed in a parallel manner while identifying demonstration opportunities relevant to speciﬁc areas of potential utility. Support should be prioritized for technology developments that will enable full exploration of the most promising utility areas identiﬁed by this study: future nuclear deals and advanced reactors. DNN R&D should increase its investment in detector technologies which allow for surface deployment of ton-scale detectors. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report AAP is an annual workshop series on Applied Antineutrino Physics. This meeting is primarily attended by technology Antineutrinos are the antimatter partner to neutrinos. In plainspoken language it is common to use the word “neutri- BWR Boiling Water Reactors are a common type of power reactor that use low enriched uranium fuel and generate Cherenkov light is produced when a charged particle, such as the positron produced in an IBD interaction, is moving CEvNS stands for Coherent Elastic Neutrino (ν) Nucleus Scattering, in which a neutrino (or antineutrino) scatters CoK Continuity of Knowledge refers to the system of data that provides uninterrupted information in order to prevent Cosmic rays are high-energy particles created when energetic protons or other atomic nuclei strike the upper atmo- C&S Containment and Surveillance are safeguards techniques applied to maintain continuity of knowledge (CoK) DNN is NNSA’s Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation. DNN R&D is the Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development, which is the R&D arm of DNN. It DPRK stands for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, commonly known as North Korea. FMCT is the Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty, a proposed international treaty to prohibit the further production of ﬁssile Geoneutrinos are electron antineutrinos from radioactive isotopes in the geological materials, typically rocks. These developers, but potential end-users are encouraged to participate. nos” to refer to both neutrinos and antineutrinos unless it is important to stress the difference, as is almost never the case in this report. Nuclear reactors primarily produce antineutrinos through the beta decay of neutron-rich ﬁssion fragments and the inverse beta decay detection process is only sensitive to antineutrinos. steam in the primary reactor vessel. faster than the speed of light in a medium. Cherenkov light is emitted in a cone about the direction of the charged particle’s trajectory. Water is a commonly used medium for larger neutrino detectors that rely on the Cherenkov process to track the charged particles produced in neutrino interactions. off of a whole nucleus. This process has a greatly enhanced probability relative to other neutrino interaction processes, including IBD, particularly with heavy nuclei, but the signal is very hard to detect. CEvNS has only recently been observed using neutrinos with energies that are about 10 times greater than typical reactor neutrinos. This type of scattering should exist for reactor neutrinos, but it has not yet been observed. Thus the potential for applications of CEvNS scattering to reactors seems promising, but it is still speculative. undetected material production/transport or undeclared facility operation. sphere. These particles rain down on the Earth’s surface and create a persistent background in all neutrino detectors. These backgrounds can be dealt with by using active measures to tag and reject cosmic rays, or by placing detectors under thick shielding to attenuate the cosmic rays. through veriﬁcation of nuclear material transfer at decalred points. C&S technologies typically include optical cameras and seals. is also known by its DOE program designation, NA-22. material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices. antineutrinos primarily come from isotopes in the uranium-238 and thorium-232 decay chains, and from potassium- GWth stands for Gigawatts Thermal. It is a unit for the total thermal power of a reactor, as opposed to the electrical HEU stands for Highly-Enriched Uranium, which corresponds to a uranium-235 concentration of 20% or greater. IAEA is the International Atomic Energy Agency, an autonomous agency within the United Nations system based in IBD stands for Inverse Beta Decay, in which an electron antineutrino (¯ν JCPOA is the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, commonly known as the Iran nuclear deal, a 2015 agreement MSRs Molten Salt Reactors are a class of advanced reactor that use a liquid salt. They come in two sub-classes, m.w.e stands for meters water-equivalent. It is a measure of cosmic-ray shielding. For an underground detector, MOX stands for Mixed Oxide Fuel. It is nuclear fuel that contains more than one oxide of ﬁssile material, usually MWth stands for Megawatts Thermal. It is a unit for the total thermal power of a reactor, as opposed to the electrical National Technical Means are a state’s suite of technological capabilities for veriﬁcation of adherence to treaties. NDA stands for Non-Destructive Assay. NPT is the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, commonly known as the Non-Proliferation Treaty, NNSA stands for the National Nuclear Security Administration. NRC is the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the agency with regulatory authority over all non-defense nuclear Nu Tools refers to the study that led to this report. It includes a play on words in which “Nu" is the English spelling Overburden refers to the material used to shield a detector from cosmic rays. For underground detectors this over- PMDA is the Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement, an agreement between the United States and Rus- Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report power, which is typically about one third of the thermal power. Vienna Austria. It is responsible for verifying nations’ compliance with their obligations under the NPT. become a positron and a neutron. This is overwhelmingly the most common process for detecting reactor neutrinos, because it has a clean, coincident detection signature comprised of a prompt signal formed by the kinetic energy and annihilation of the positron, followed by a delayed signal from the neutron capture. between Iran, the United States, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and Germany on the Iranian nuclear program. one in which ﬁssile material is dissolved into the salt and another in which the salt serves only as a coolant. MSR designs can utilize a thermal or fast neutron spectrum. They typically operate with higher temperatures and closer to atmospheric pressure when compared to light water reactors. More details can be found in an overview. typical undisturbed rock has a density of 2.6 g/cm, such that 0.38 m of rock corresponds to 1 m.w.e shielding. consisting of plutonium blended with natural uranium, reprocessed uranium, or depleted uranium. MOX fuel is an alternative to the LEU fuel used in light water reactors. power, which is typically about one third of the thermal power. Examples include satellites, radar, and electronic communications systems. an international treaty whose objective is to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology, to promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and to further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and complete disarmament. It opened for signatures in 1968, and entered into force in 1970. Currently, 191 states are parties to the NPT. activities in the U.S. for the Greek letter ν, which is the symbol scientists use for neutrinos, and is pronounced as “new". burden is the rocks and dirt between surface and the detector. Overburden is often measured in meters of water-equivalent shielding or (m.w.e.). sia signed in 2000. It regulates the conversion of non-essential plutonium into mixed oxide (MOX) fuel used Safeguards-by-Design (SBD) refers to the consideration of safeguards implementation early in facility planning from Scintillators are materials that emit optical photons (scintillation light) as charged particles lose energy traversing Signiﬁcant quantity (SQ) is the IAEA deﬁnition of the approximate amount of nuclear material required for fabri- SMRs Small Modular Reactors are a class of advanced commercial reactor that operate in the 10s-100s of MW range. TRL stands for Technical Readiness Level. The TRL levels of projects or technologies are described is the DOE Tech- Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report to produce electricity. Both sides were required to render a signiﬁcant amount of their of weapons grade plutonium into reactor grade plutonium alongside reaching a standard for spent fuel to be mixed with more highly irradiating products. design through operation. SBD approaches seek to improve safeguard-ability in a facility’s design and reduce safeguards implementation costs at the facility. More details can be found in a safeguards-by-design guidance report. them. Organic scintillators comprised of hydrocarbons are commonly used for neutrino detection via the IBD reaction since they provide both the required protons and the means to detect the resulting reaction products. cation of a nuclear explosive device. Many SMR facility designs offer the capability to incorporate multiple reactors, called modules, on a single site. Advantages of SMRs include: lower capital investment, small physical footprint, and ﬂexible power additions with the modules. nology Readiness Assessment Guide: https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/ 400-series/0413.3-EGuide-04-admchg1. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Charge to the Executive Group for the Antineutrino Reactor Monitoring Scoping Study  NNSA’s Office of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D) detection portfolio seeks strategic input to guide future R&D investments. The charge to the Antineutrino Reactor Monitoring Scoping Study Executive Group is to facilitate broad engagement with interested communities on the topic of antineutrino-based monitoring of nuclear reactors and associated post-irradiation fuel cycle activities. The particular focus of such engagement should be on the potential utility of antineutrino detection technologies and required detection capabilities in the following contexts: • Near-field: detection systems deployed 10-2000m from a reactor with the knowledge  • Far-field: detection systems deployed 2km or further from a reactor, with or without the  The concept of utility should be explicitly placed in the context of existing or potential policy needs. Furthermore, detailed descriptions of quantities to be measured, considerations for practical implementation, and comparisons to existing techniques should be included. While existing monitoring methods are not directly covered in the workshop, current capabilities should serve as a benchmark for the implementation of the evaluated techniques.  “Antineutrino detection technologies” encompasses detection methods, system implementations, and/or deployment modalities that: • Are already demonstrated in research or field environments, • Are under active design and/or construction, • Can be reasonably foreseen based on plausible technology and engineering projections  It is requested that the Executive Group develop materials to enable engagement directly with experts in a wide variety of fields and solicit their knowledge and feedback on the use of antineutrino detection technologies in their particular domain of expertise. Communities of interest include: • International and Domestic Safeguards Agencies and Practitioners • Reactor vendors and operators (utilities) • Nuclear Security and Safety NGOs • Nonproliferation and Nuclear Security Policy SMEs  Following the evolutionary course of the antineutrino applications field to date, engagement with the neutrino physics community and supporting Scientific Funding Agencies will also be of considerable value.  A virtual forum shall be held mid-2020, bringing together interested experts to review the concepts and feedback collected from these communities. A final report should be prepared by  Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report September 30, 2020. The utility report is expected to capture input from all perspectives and provide information to help guide future technology development and implementation efforts.  The following experts were interviewed by members of the Nu Tools Executive Group over the course of this study. These individuals provided views that informed the report, but they were not directly involved in its writing. The Executive Group greatly appreciates the following people for helping inform the study ﬁndings and recommendations. Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report The purpose of the Nu Tools Mini-Workshop was to engage with the reactor neutrino detector development community. Although our study is focused on the utility of these technologies and not on the technologies themselves, we believe that it is important to engage with the neutrino scientiﬁc community to ensure that we understood their perspective, and that we were aware of any prior work that was done by this community to understand potential uses of their technology. We were particularly interested in any previous engagement with potential users. To ensure that this community was aware of our activities, each day’s session opened with an overview talk on the Nu Tools study. The Mini-Workshop consisted of two days of virtual presentations from groups around the world involved in reactor neutrino detector development. Presenters were asked to focus on the applications of their technology and interactions with potential end-users. Of the 30 groups that were invited to participate, 21 chose to give a presentation (see agenda below). Of these 14 were on inverse beta decay detection and seven were on coherent elastic neutrino nucleus scattering. The presentations included speakers from ten different countries. Many of the invited groups that did not choose to present still participated in the workshop discussions. A total of 131 individuals from 14 countries registered to attend. Presentation slides from the Mini-Workshop can be found at https://indico.phys.vt.edu/event/43/ Day One – Wednesday, July 22, 2020 Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report nutools.ornl.gov!! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report nutools.ornl.gov  Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report !nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report !nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report !nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report !nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report !nutools.ornl.gov! Nu Tools: Exploring Practical Roles for Neutrinos in Nuclear Energy and Security – Final Report