<title>Traffic control Management System and Collision   Avoidance System </title> <title>1  INTRODUCTION  </title> In India the number of accidents per day is around 1,274 as per the report by NCBI, out of which many accidents  occur due to driver not recognizing the sign boards.   At present the sign boards are used to alert the driver about the upcoming speed breaker, turnings, accident spots,  school zone etc. But the high level of traffic and narrow roads in India makes driver distracted and driver fails  to recognize the warning sign boards. By designing a system in which the vehicle should be able to recognize  the sign boards even if the driver fails to recognize and alert the driver if proper action has not been taken within  certain time interval,  we can reduce the number of accidents. This feature can make them abide to rules and  regulations.  In order to minimize and overcome the problems of road safety, we have developed an automatic Traffic Sign  Detection and Recognition system or TSDR system. This system can be used for effectively detecting and recognizing different traffic signs from the captured images or by using image sensors. In certain situations, the  driver may not notice the oncoming Traffic signs which may lead to fatal accidents. The TSDR system comes to  use for such adverse situations. The main objective of the system is to develop the TSDR system to be an automatic system although it may be a difficult job owing to the fact that we have to take the continuous environmental and lighting conditions.  The other issues that play an important factor are the multiple traffic signs appearing at the same instant of time,  blurred images of fading traffic signals. We must also make sure that the TSDR system should avoid the false  detection of non-sign boards.  The aim of this project is to develop a system which can efficiently detect the traffic signs and classify  the  detected signs into separate classes. All of these actions are to be performed considering the real-time scenario.  <title>2  RELATED WORK </title> Vehicle speed control and over speed violation using IOT [1],  From this system we learnt that it can automatically control the speed of a particular vehicle by detecting speed sign labels from the nearby signboard. In case  the driver does not slow down his vehicle speed, the vehicle details such as license plate number are sent to  authorities and speed of the vehicle is reduced to the threshold level.  The smart accident detection and control system [2] From this system we could infer that it was performed on  intersecting roads utilizing Raspberry Pi and microcontroller. The proposed system is capable of automatically  detecting any vehicle accident. It then takes necessary steps to help the drivers who were injured due to the  accident. The system also sends warning messages to nearby vehicles regarding the location of the road accident.  A smart system [3] has been proposed to alert and control speed of vehicle and also to notify individuals in the  area in case of an accident. The system uses a distance sensor to monitor gap between vehicles or obstacles.  Whenever an accident has occurred ,an email will be sent to the accountable driver with vehicle details.  This .  GSM and GPS based system[4] was to effectively designed to prevent any kind of accidents and to detect  them if such events occur.  GSM and GPS were used to get the exact location of the user.   The signboard monitoring system [5] is used to detect when a vehicle meets with an accident. This is done with  the help of  vibration sensors that detect vibration signals in case of vehicle collisions and sends it to a Raspberry  Pi controller. The microcontroller then sends mail alerts through IOT to the rescue team to help the driver who  has met with an accident.  Detection of accidents precisely by means of both vibration sensor and Alcohol detection using eye blink sensors  [6], As a future implementation to the existing system, we can add a wireless webcam which can be used for  capturing the images of the accident site which will help in providing driver assistance.  Smart Accident Detection and Control System (SAD-CS) for  intersecting road (‘Plus’ junction) [7],  [8] This  system can be developed by using Raspberry Pi Microcontroller. An on-board unit in every vehicle is required  for such a system. The proposed system is capable of automatically and instantaneously detecting the vehicle  accident and perform actions to help the affected people. The system also propagates warning messages to all  the roadside vehicles to avoid the further accidents in the same lane. For accident avoidance implementation in  the system, tire pressure of the vehicle is measured. The accident detection part of the system is implemented  with the help of node MCU controller which has an inbuilt WiFi module. MQ7 sensor is used in order to monitor  the pollution level in the particular traffic lane. This helps to reduce vehicular accidents as well as get information  about the environmental status of the road by pollution monitoring.  The driver-assistance system [9] This system is capable of lane and painted traffic sign detection by using a car's  on-board camera. This is integrated in a network which connects different users to enhance the efficiency of the  detection of the painted traffic sign boards. A novel system to automatically control the speed of the vehicle [10]  This system performs speed control of a vehicle by first detecting the speed signs labels from speed sign boards,  which are laid on the roadside. Then the system takes necessary steps to take it to the knowledge of the driver  by sending a caution notification indicating the driver to adjust the vehicle speed according to to the speed sign  label that has been detected.  <title>3  PROPOSED SYSTEM  </title> The following are the main objectives of Traffic Management and Collision Avoidance using IoT:  •To design a smart sign board which can communicate with the vehicle.  •To send visual and audio alert to the vehicle if driver fails to adjust speed according to the detected sign  board.  •To alert the user if the vehicle speed is not reduced if the detected sign board is  a speed breaker/hump    in the road.  •To develop an IR receiver-transmitter system for allowing ambulance to move in a particular road    and making way for traffic.  •To record the number of vehicles that have been alerted by the buzzer to reach  optimal speed in case    of a sign board detected using IOT.  TMSCA has two functional units. One is for detection of sign board and other one is measuring speed of   vehicle and user alert with auto break functionality.  In prototype of TMSCA, sign board is implemented using Arduino and RF transmitter as shown in the figure 1,  which transmits the specific beep sound to specific type of sign board like speed breaker, school zone board etc.  The vehicle also contains RF receiver and Arduino, which starts receiving the beep sound when near to sign  board.Here the Arduino microcontroller is attached to the RF Transmitter which transmits radio frequency in a  specified range such that it is detected by the nearby Vehicle approaching the signboard by means of an RF  receiver attached to it.  Figure 1: Block diagram of Smart Sign Board  After receiving the code by the approaching Vehicle as shown in figure 2, Arduino starts measuring the current  speed of vehicle and if the speed is above recommended speed then it starts giving alert using buzzer. If the speed  of the vehicle is not reduced even after receiving the audio alert from the buzzer, then the vehicle will auto break  i.e., the vehicle speed is reduced to zero automatically. The Driver input to our prototype car is   given using a Bluetooth module and mobile app.  As shown in Figure 3, Vehicle control system consists of Arduino microcontroller which is attached to an RF  receiver. The RF receiver receives radio signal transmitted from the transmitter attached to the vehicle. The  Arduino identifies the type of sign board based on the unique radio frequency emitted and selects it from the  selection button.  A Bluetooth module is used for giving Driver input to the car by means of control messages, stating the vehicular  speed to be reduced. After receiving the message, Arduino sends an alert by means of a Buzzer which alerts the  driver to reduce the speed.  Whenever the emergency vehicle is detected like ambulances, Police vehicles etc.. on the lane, an algorithm is  used to change the traffic light from red to green to allow the vehicle to move easily.    <title>4.  IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS </title> The sign board detection is composed of RF transmitter, receiver system that receives signal from the detected  sign board. If the speed of the vehicle is above the recommended speed according to the sign board, then it  automatically adjusts the vehicle speed to the specified speed of the sign board.   The Bluetooth module present on the vehicle is connected to an application called Bluetooth electronics. Once  the connection has been established the LED indicator will stop blinking indicating successful connection. With  the help of Bluetooth module we can control the movement of vehicle ,display the mode of signboard when the  vehicle reaches its vicinity or to change the signal of signboard to red or green for the emergency mode.   (b) Communication between signboard and vehicle   The vehicle has two dc motors which are connected to the motor drivers, which is in turn connected to the  microcontroller.  When the microcontroller receives the signal from the signboard from the IR receiver, this input  is processed and  is then sent to the motor which then reduces the speed of the vehicle accordingly The signboard  signal are received by the vehicle and control messages are displayed on the Bluetooth device regarding the  mode of signboard and the speed to which it is set.  Thus various actuations that take place automatically in our prototype vehicle module for each particular sign  board  detected.  ● The GPIO pins of Arduino is used to control and interface with sensors, and motors.  ● Serial communication is established between Bluetooth module and vehicle (car)  ● We then wait for user input (Button press). If button is pressed then car undergoes the process of  movement  i.e forward/backward/left/right. If the button is not pressed, the vehicle ceases to move  ● We enable interrupt for serial communication between car and sign board so that when the vehicle comes  within a specific range of the signboard, the microcontroller should stop all its other function and service the  interrupt.  ● Check for light pulses from IR transmitter. If detected, then buzzer is activated.   Then the time period of pulses is determined .Based on the time period following actions are performed.  ● If pulses are between 65 -75 (humps) ,then speed is reduced to  30% speed, else  ● If pulses are between 45 -55 (Speed limit) , then speed is reduced to 80% speed else  ● If pulses are between 85 -95 (School zone) , then speed is reduced to 50% speed else  ● If pulses are between 105 -115 (Freeway) then then speed is not restricted.  For the Ambulance Mode, the vehicle sends the pulses to the upcoming signboard.  ● If the pulses are between 45 – 55 ms, green light of signboard is turned on i.e detected vehicle is ambulance.  ● If pulses are between 65 – 75 ms red light is turned on i.e the vehicle has crossed the road.  Step 3: Select Mode for signboard.  Step 4: Check for incoming vehicle pulse signals.  by buzzer and send pulse signal to restrict  speed.  according to vehicle input.  Results obtained are displayed as in the figures below. It is observed that Bluetooth Module has captured four  different sign boards that have been detected, namely:   i. Freeway (no sign board detected)  ii. Humps  iii .School zone and   iv. Speed Limit sign board.  The four buttons: Red, Green, Blue and Yellow are used to control the movement of the vehicle i.e., for Right  Turn, Forward, Left Turn and Backward  respectively.  By pressing the A and X buttons the system can be configured for ambulance mode to give red to green signals  for ambulance movement on a particular lane.  Figure 5: Detection of Freeway and humps sign boards  First instance of Figure 5 represents the Freeway (no sign board) detected and the car speed is automatically set  to maximum. Similarly for Humps detected, the speed of car is set to 30% of maximum speed.  In figure 6, Sign board being detected is School Zone and accordingly the speed of car is reduced to 50% of  maximum speed.  In figure 7, next sign board detected is the Speed Limit sign. After detecting this Sign Limit board, the speed of  the vehicle is automatically reduced to 50% of its maximum speed.  All the actuations that take place in TMSCA system can be summarized as given by Table 1 shown below:  Time  period  of  signal  pulses  Type  of  Sign  Automatic  change  in  vehicular  received (Tp in mS)  board detected  speed  (in  terms  of  %  of  max.  45<Tp<55  Speed Limit  80% of Max.  105<Tp<115  Freeway  100% of Max.  speed)  65<Tp<75  Humps  30% of Max.  85<Tp<95  School Zone  50% of Max.  <title>5.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE </title> The Traffic Management and Collision Avoidance system has been carefully designed in accordance with the  user requirements such as:  ● Detection of sign board  ● Alert the driver if speed not reduced and also auto break  ● Should be able to detect various sign boards and process the required speed limit of vehicles.  ● The system should be able to give preference to movement of ambulances.  In conclusion, TMSCA was specifically designed in order to combat the road accidents occurring in India on a  daily basis. This objective was achieved by developing a system that would  monitor the driver’s vehicle and  send alerts if they did not abide by the rules of any particular sign boards on the road.   This project design is also useful for drivers operating emergency vehicles like ambulances which require by  passing of red traffic signals in case of emergency situations.  TMSCA is a fully automatic prototype system and will save distracted driver from getting into accident. It increases pedestrian safety. It can save many thousands of lives. It is cost effective, hence can be implemented  economically.  As future enhancement the following updation can be incorporated to TMSCA system. Designing an IoT cloud  database that records the drivers who do not respond to alert messages conveyed by the sign board detection  system.  Record the number of special vehicles like ambulances that require traffic signal light change from red to green  in case of emergencies in a congested traffic lane.  <title>References </title> [1] Ali Fadhal Athab and Asaad. S Daghal 2020, IOT System to Limit Speed Rate by Using GPS and RF Devices   IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 928 032077.  [2] Ashokkumar, K. & Deepak, Ch & Chowdary, D.. (2019). Sign Board Monitoring and Vehicle Accident  Detection  System  Using  IoT.  IOP  Conference  Series:  Materials  Science  and  Engineering.  590.  012015.  10.1088/1757-899X/590/1/012015.   [3] Murshed, Mubashir & Chowdhury, Md. (2019). An IoT Based Car Accident Prevention and Detection System with Smart Brake Control.  [4]  K. Ashok Reddy and R. Kumar (2018), "Vehicle Speed Control and Over-Speed Violation Alert Using IoT  and Hall Effect Sensor," 2018 3rd IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information  & Communication Technology (RTEICT), 2018, pp. 1244-1249, doi: 10.1109/RTEICT42901.2018.9012609.   [5] M. S. A. Hadi, A. Saha, F. Ahmad, M. S. Hasan and M. H. Milon (2018), "A Smart Accident Detection and  Control System in Vehicular Networks," 2018 5th International Conference on Networking, Systems and Security (NSysS), 2018, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/NSysS.2018.8631386.  [6]K. Ashokkumar1, Ch. Venkata Deepak, D. Vamsi Rattaiah Chowdary, “Sign Board Monitoring and Vehicle  Accident Detection System  Using IoT-A Smart  Accident Detection and  Control  System  in Vehicular Networks”5th International Conference on Networking, Systems and Security (NS vs S), April 10 , 2019 Pages: 2  – 8, DOI: 10.1109/MSEM.2019.590105.   [7]Vehicle  Collision Detection and  Avoidance  with  Pollution  Monitoring System Using  IoT,Mahesh  A.  Rakhonde; S. A. Khoje; R. D. Komati, 2018 IEEE Global Conference on Wireless Computing and Networking (GCWCN), November 23 -24 , 2018 Pages: 75 – 78, DOI: 10.1109/GCWCN.2018.8668622.   [8]Detection of lanes and traffic signs painted on road using on-board camera, Tamás Ferencz Bente; Szilvia  Szeghalmy; Attila Fazekas, 2018 IEEE International Conference on Future IoT Technologies (Future IoT), January 18 -19  , 2018 Pages: 1 – 39, DOI: 10.1109/FIOT.2018.8325600.  [9] Vehicle Speed Control and Over-Speed Violation Alert Using IoT and Hall Effect Sensor ,K Ashok Reddy;  Rajesh Kumar, 2018 3rd IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information & Communication  Technology  (RTEICT),  May  18 -19 ,2018  Pages:  1  –  74,  DOI:  10.1109/RTEICT42901.2018.9012609.  [10]R. H. Dev, D. H. Emery, E. S. Rustici, H. M. Brown, D. S. Wiggin, E.W. Gray, et al., “Network management  system using model – based intelligence,”Ed:Google Patents, 1996. May, 2019 Pages: 1 – 4, Volume-8, DOI:  10.1109/IRJTE.2019.A10400581C19. 