 periodic function and its derivatives in the nodes of a uniform grid, is considered. The proposed method is based on the periodicity properties of trigonometric functions and is reduced to solving only systems of linear algebraic equations of the second order; solutions of these systems can be obtained in advance. When implementing this method, it is necessary to calculate the coefficients of interpolation trigonometric polynomials that interpolate the values of the function itself and the values of its derivatives at the nodes of the uniform grid; known fast Fourier transform algorithms can be used for this purpose. Examples of construction of trigonometric Hermite splines of the first and second orders are given. The proposed method can be recommended for practical use.  Hermite interpolation, trigonometric, Hermite interpolation, trigonometric splines, trigonometric Hermite splines.  In many problems of science and technology, the problem of interpolation of a function in such a statement often arises. Let order inclusively. Let also on the segment values of the function itself be known in the grid nodes derivatives  (1,2,...r  In the case where the function that satisfies these conditions is called the Hermit interpolation polynomial.  In many cases, a uniform grid is given on the interval class of trigonometric polynomials Hermitian trigonometric polynomial. The problem of constructing a trigonometric Hermite polynomial that satisfies conditions (1) was considered in [Den].  A certain disadvantage of the Hermit trigonometric polynomial is its analyticity. Therefore, in our opinion, the problem of constructing Hermit trigonometric splines belonging to classes future, such polynomials will be called Hermite trigonometric splines.  There are different approaches to constructing Hermite interpolation splines. For example, one of them is based on a modification of Hermite polynomial interpolation methods. Note that the problem of constructing a Hermite polynomial polynomial on a segment in general is considered in detail, for example, in [2]; the construction of Hermite polynomial splines is considered in [3,4].  The construction of Hermite trigonometric polynomials and the problems associated with this approach are considered, for example, in [5]; there is also a sufficient bibliography on this issue. This approach and its development are also considered in [6], [7].  UDC 517.58 + 519.652  (), (1,2k ) of this function. You need to build a function ()x of class C,  ), depending on parameters that satisfies the conditions application of fundamental trigonometric functions. This approach is considered, for example, in [8]; it is expedient to emphasize that in this work the fundamental trigonometric functions are constructed, in our opinion, in the most natural way. Other variants of this approach, which differ in the methods of constructing fundamental functions, are considered in [9], [10], [11]. The disadvantage of this approach is the difficulty of constructing fundamental trigonometric functions of higher orders; the consequence of this is that the constructed Hermite polynomials interpolate the function itself and its derivative only of the first order. is given in [12]. This approach is based on the periodicity properties of trigonometric functions and is reduced to solving only two systems of linear algebraic equations can be obtained in advance. When implementing this approach, it is necessary to calculate the coefficients of interpolation trigonometric polynomials that interpolate the values of the function itself and the values of its derivatives in the nodes of a uniform grid; known fast Fourier transform algorithms can be used for this purpose. There are also examples of constructing trigonometric Hermite polynomials for  As we have already said, a certain disadvantage of the Hermite trigonometric polynomial is its analyticity. Therefore, in our opinion, the problem of constructing trigonometric Hermite’s functions belonging to classes is interesting. trigonometric splines.   The aim of this work is to develop a constructive method for constructing Hermite trigonometric splines that interpolate a function and its derivatives of order interval  During interpolating functions, it is often the case that in the nodes of a uniform grid the segment derivatives of this function. In the case when the interpolation is carried out by algebraic polynomials, Hermite’s polynomials are used, which interpolate in the nodes of the grid function itself and the value of its derivatives. If the interpolation of the function is supposed to be carried out by trigonometric polynomials, then the question arises about the construction of trigonometric polynomials, which are analogs of algebraic Hermite polynomials; such trigonometric polynomials will hereinafter be called Hermite trigonometric polynomials.  As we have already said, a certain disadvantage of the Hermite trigonometric polynomial is its analyticity. Therefore, in our opinion, the problem of constructing trigonometric Hermite functions belonging to classes trigonometric splines. Consider the construction of trigonometric Hermite splines in more detail, starting with the case  Let on derivatives. Denote the value of the function and its derivatives in the nodes of the grid centered on the grid  Another approach to the construction of Hermite trigonometric polynomials is based on the  Finally, another approach to the construction of trigonometric Hermite polynomials of arbitrary order  , and belong to spaces C, (r=1,2).     [0,2, not only the values of the function  are known, but also the values of the  ), and let the nodes of this grid be given the value of the function and its first-order  , (1,2,...,jN). With respect to these derivatives, we will assume that these derivatives are where  It is clear that the series that define the function basis of Weierstrass are uniformly convergent series, therefore, they provide a continuous function. Further, these series can be differentiated by members, and the first derivative of these functions will also be continuous. Thus, it is clear that all functions spline itself  To find the coefficients interpolating the value of the function trigonometric polynomial nodes  The proposed approach to the construction of trigonometric Hermite splines is based on the fact that the values of trigonometric functions depend only on the node numbers of this grid finding the coefficients of interpolation trigonometric polynomials and the subsequent solution of dimension 2.  To illustrate, we construct a trigonometric Hermite spline that interpolates the function derivative we will lower a grid index 0.   Calculate the value of the spline and equality we have where  0 ( , ); 0 ( , );  ,a(1,2, ...,jn) - are uncertain coefficients.   in grid nodes  and equate them to the values of the trigonometric polynomial ,   and equating the value of the derivative at the nodes of the grid  the value of the interpolation  , we receive systems of linear algebraic equations 2 systems of linear algebraic equations  .  1 order in grid nodes , which we will look for in the form (1); at the same time for reduction  Equating the obtained values of the spline interpolation polynomial we obtain relative to the coefficients where  0A, 0A and 0B - coefficients of the trigonometric polynomial .   01( , );  01( , );  '( )ft in grid nodes , and given that 10A , we obtain systems of equations  Substituting the found coefficients in (1), we obtain a trigonometric Hermite spline sewn in knots of a grid grid..  Thinking similarly, it is easy to obtain a trigonometric Hermite polynomial that is crosslinked at the nodes of the grid. such a spline has the form where the coefficients and coefficients polynomials  Let us now consider the construction of a trigonometric Hermite spline that interpolates a function and its first and second derivatives at grid nodes.  Calculating the value of the spline equating them with the corresponding value of trigonometric polynomials interpolating the function and its derivatives in the nodes of the same grid, it is easy to obtain systems of equations for the required coefficients We confine ourselves to giving formulas for calculating the trigonometric Hermite spline that interpolates the function while still, we will omit the grid index. This spline has the form (7), where  ()a,     (6)  0T and 1T interpolating the function and its derivative in the grid nodes, respectively  0( , )mN k t;       0( , )mN k tS k t;  1( , );      1( , )S k t;  C k t and coefficients equation where function interpolating derivatives, respectively 1 and 2 orders of magnitude  10( , ) 20( , ) Finally, it is advisable to make such a remark. When constructing Hermite trigonometric splines, we assumed that the values of the derivatives on the grid remove, for example, in this way [12]. We consider a differential analogue of the Kronecker symbol  Given this, the Hermit trigonometric spline, for example, for where  In what follows, we will assume that when calculating the values of the Hermite trigonometric spline, we apply the operator to it.  2( , );      2( , )S k t;  0A, AB, (1,2,...,kn)-coefficients of the trigonometric polynomial interpolating the  in grid nodes , а 1 , 1AB and 2 , 2AB - coefficients of trigonometric polynomials and we have a formula (2). and we obtain the formula for the derivative with a free term..  dimension the equations of these systems..  1. A method for constructing Hermite trigonometric splines interpolating the function itself and its  2. Thinking similarly, it is easy to construct trigonometric Hermite splines for larger values of the 3. The solution of the systems of linear algebraic equations necessary for the implementation of the  4. When calculating the coefficients of interpolation trigonometric polynomials required for the  5. Given the above, the proposed method of constructing trigonometric Hermite splines can be  1. Berezin: I.S., Zhidkov N.P. Computing Methods. Pergamon Press, 1965/Hamming R.W. Numerical 2. J. H. Ahlberg, E. N. Nilson, J. L. Walsh, The Theory of Splines and Their Applications. - Academic 3. Zavyalov Y., Kvasov B., Miroshnichenko V. Methods of spline functions.- M .: Science, 1980.- 4. Delvos F.J. Hermite interpolation with trigonometric polinomials. - BIT33 (1993), 113-123.  5. Lyche T. A newton form for trigonometric Hermite interpolation.- June 1979: 6. Jinyuan Du, Huili Han, Guoxiang Jind. On trigonometric and paratrigonometric Hermite 7. Achiezer, N. I. (1956). Theory of approximation. Translated by Charles J. Hyman. New York: 8. Xuli Han, Piecewise trigonometric Hermite interpolation,- Published 2015 in Applied Mathematics 9. Berruta J.-P., Annick Welscher А. Fourier and barycentric formulae for equidistant Hermite  10. 9. Dechevsky L.T, Rumen UluchevR. Hermite Interpolation Using ERBS with Trigonometric  11. V. Denysiuk About one method for constructing Hermite trigonometric polynomials 12. V. Denysiuk About one method for constructing Hermite trigonometric polynomials arXiv:1902.04327 [pdf]  1p ; in addition, known Fourier fast algorithms can be used to calculate the right-hand sides of derivatives to p-го (1,2p ) order inclusive in grid nodes , (, 1,2, ...n ), for the implementation of which is necessary solution 2-х systems of linear algebraic equations, each of which is a system 1p  order.. parameter p.   proposed method can be done in advance; in practical application in each case, it is sufficient to substitute the coefficients of interpolation trigonometric polynomials into the solutions found.. construction of trigonometric Hermite polynomials by the proposed method, it is expedient to apply the known algorithms for fast Fourier transform.  recommended for widespread use in practice.    Methods for Scientists and Engineers. –MC Grow-Hill Book Company, INC. - 1962. Press. New York/London, 1967.  352p. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/226071074 interpolation.- Journal of Approximation Theory 131 (2004) 74 – 99 Frederick Ungar Publishing. and Computation  trigonometric interpolation. - Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis. Volume 23, Issue 3,  November 2007, Pages 307-320 Polynomial Local Functions.- Large-scale scientific computing. 8th international conference, LSSC  2011, Sozopol, Bulgaria, June 6–10, 2011. Revised selected papers (pp.420-428).  arXiv:1902.04327 