Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, with paying special attention to the formation dynamics of heavy jets. Two diﬀerent approaches are studied: ﬁrst one, where heavy quarks are produced in the hard scattering subprocesses, implemented in the Monte-Carlo generator pegasus, and another scenario, where the hard scattering is calculated at NLO with MadGraph5 TMD parton shower is included (implemented in the Monte-Carlo generator Cascade3). We compare the predictions obtained in both schemes with latest experimental data for associated Z +b production cross sections and the relative production rate σ(Z +c)/σ(Z + b) collected by the ATLAS and CMS Collaborations at kinematic observables (denoted as z jet production mechanisms. Using these variables we trace the shape of the simulated b-jet events and recommend that these observables be taken into consideration in the forthcoming experimental analyses. Keywords: Z boson, b-jets, fragmentation, QCD evolution, TMD parton densities. Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 141980, Dubna, Moscow region, Russia We reconsider the associated Z boson and charm or beauty jet production at the LHC have never been systematically studied at previous accelerators. In this article we revisit the associated production of Z bosons and b-jets. This process involves both weak and strong interactions and therefore serves as a complex test of the Standard Model, perturbative QCD and our knowledge of parton densities. On the experimental side, we have at our disposal the data collected by ATLAS and CMS collaborations [1–5]. retical and experimental results with respect to many observables, such as the diﬀerential cross sections and particle correlations. Here we wish to go one step deeper in our understanding and draw attention to two new observables which can be used as clean probes of b-jet formation dynamics. We aim at a diﬀerence between ‘prompt’ and ‘non-prompt’ production cases. The former class refers to the situation when the b-quark is produced in the hard scattering subprocess; it further radiates lighter partons and after all evolves into a jet containing b-hadrons. The latter class refers to jets initiated by a light parton (gluon or quark), and then b-quarks (or rather b-hadrons) appear from a parton evolution cascade. In principle, one can distinguish between these two kinds of b-jets using an appropriate machine learning technique for gluon-quark jet classiﬁcation. However, this is not straightforward and should be done carefully [8,9]. we ﬁnd that in the jets originating from b-quarks (i.e., ‘prompt’), b-hadrons carry larger momentum fraction z hadrons move closer to the jet axis. The goal of the study is to give quantitative estimates and to see to what extent our expectations are supported by real data. for cross sections of processes containing heavy quarks. One of these approaches is the so-called four-ﬂavour number scheme (4FNS), where only gluon distributions and ﬁrst two quark generations are involved in the QCD evolution equations for parton (quark and gluon) densities in a proton, so that b-quarks appear in a massive ﬁnal state as a result of gluon splitting g → b which allows a b-quark density in the initial state where the b-quark is typically treated massless above the ﬂavour threshold. Up to all orders, the 4FNS and 5FNS schemes should give exactly the same results, while at a given order diﬀerence can occur two diﬀerent schemes based on the transverse momentum dependent (TMD) quark and gluon distributions in a proton on the O(αα With the LHC in operation, one can access a number of ‘rare’ processes which could Earlier, we have demonstrated [6, 7] a quite reasonable agreement between the theo- We discuss kinematic criteria that can be helpful to discriminate these cases. Namely, There are two commonly used approaches in perturbative QCD (pQCD) calculations To calculate the Z + b-jet total and diﬀerential cross sections at the LHC we employ which gives the leading contribution to the production cross section in the small x region, where the gluon density dominates over the quark densities. An essential point here is using the CCFM evolution equation to describe the QCD evolution of the TMD gluon density in a proton. The gauge-invariant oﬀ-shell amplitude for the gluon-gluon fusion subprocess has been calculated in Ref. [15,16], where all the relevant technical details are explained. initial state. These are the ﬂavor excitation processes and the quark-antiquark annihilation processes which could play a role essentially at large transverse momenta (or, respectively, at large x which is needed to produce large p can even dominate over the gluon density. The contributions from the quark-induced subprocesses (2) and (3) are calculated within a conventional DGLAP-based (collinear) factorization scheme, which provides better theoretical grounds in the region of large x. The evaluation of the production amplitudes is straightforward and needs no explanations. used at the kinematic conditions where it is best suitable. This scheme is implemented in the Monte-Carlo event generator pegasus [17], which has been used for numerical calculations. Taking all the three subprocesses (1), (2) and (3) into account we extend the predictions to the whole kinematic range. Note that at least one heavy quark Q is always present in the ﬁnal state already at the amplitude level. cluding the eﬀects of the initial and ﬁnal state parton showering. For the collinear part of the calculation, that has been done using the conventional pythia8 [18] algorithm The oﬀ-shell part of the calculations includes this kind of correction in the form of TMD gluon densities. The subsequent decay Z → l is incorporated already at the production step at the amplitude level in order to fully reproduce the experimental setup. equation [20–23]. We ﬁnd it to be a suitable option since it smoothly interpolates between the small-x Balitsky-Fadin-Kuraev-Lipatov (BFKL) [24–26] gluon dynamics and large-x DGLAP one. We adopted the latest JH-2013 parametrization, namely, we choose the JH-2013 set 2 [27]. The corresponding TMD gluon density was ﬁtted to high-precision DIS data on the proton structure functions F on TMD matrix elements and involves the two-loop strong coupling constant, the kinematic consistency constraint [28,29] and non-singular terms in the CCFM gluon splitting function [30]. For the conventional quark and gluon densities, we used the MMHT’2014 (NLO) set [31]. approach, which was introduced [11, 12] to treat the DGLAP evolution [32–35]. The In addition, we take into account two subleading subprocesses involving quarks in the Our scheme [6,7] represents a combination of two techniques with each of them being The parton-level calculation returned by pegasus has further been improved by in- For the TMD gluon density in a proton, we used a numerical solution of the CCFM This method represents a more rigorous scheme based on the parton branching (PB) method provides a solution of these equations and coincides with the standard methods to solve the DGLAP equations for inclusive distributions at NLO and NNLO. It allows one to simultaneously take into account soft-gluon emission at z → 1 and the transverse momentum q to a natural determination of the TMD quark and gluon densities in a proton. One of the advantages of this approach is that the PB TMDs can be combined with standard (on-shell) production amplitudes, which can be calculated at higher orders with. Here we use matrix elements calculated with next-to-leading (NLO) order with MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [36] using the HERWIG6 subtraction terms, which are suitable for combination with PB-TMDs. Carlo event generator Cascade3 [19]. A special procedure is adopted for the initial partons’ transverse momenta: a transverse momentum is assigned according to the TMD density, and then the parton-parton system is boosted to its center-of-mass frame and rotated in such a way that only the longitudinal and energy components are nonzero. The energy and longitudinal component of the initial momenta are recalculated taking into account the virtual masses [19,38]. This method keeps the parton-parton invariant mass exactly conserved, while the rapidity of the partonic system is approximately restored, depending on the transverse momenta. Two sets of them, which diﬀer from each other by the choice of the scale in the QCD coupling, were obtained [39]. In the numerical calculations below we use HERAI+II-2018 set 2. justify our approach by confronting the results of our simulations with the newest CMS and ATLAS data. We start by listing the parameters of our calculations. Following [41], we set the charm and beauty quark masses to m the mass of Z boson m sin QCD coupling according to [27]. The default renormalization scale was taken as µ while the default factorization scale for the oﬀ-shell gluon-gluon fusion subprocess was pair. This choice is dictated mainly by the CCFM evolution algorithm (see [27] for more information). For the quark-induced subprocesses (2) and (3) we keep it equal to the renormalization scale, µ calculations for oﬀ-shell gluon-gluon fusion subprocess (1) we use auxiliary ’+’ and ’−’ TMD gluon densities instead of the default TMD gluon distribution functions. These two sets refer to the varied hard scales in the strong coupling constant α amplitude: ’+’ stands for 2µ subprocesses (2) and (3) we just vary the hard scale around its default value between halved and doubled magnitude, as usual. The tool to be used to calculate the observables within the PB approach is the Monte- The PB TMD parton densities were obtained via ﬁtting to precise HERA DIS data. Before we turn to the discussion on the ’prompt’ and ’non-prompt’ b-jets we have to θ= 0.23122. The electromagnetic coupling is taken as α(m) = 1/128.74. In the calculations performed with pegasus we set Λ= 200 MeV and use two-loop = ˆs + Q, where Qis the net transverse momentum of the initial oﬀ-shell gluon For the PB calculation with MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO, we set m= 1.47 GeV,q = 4.5 GeV, α(m) = 0.118 and µ= µ=m+ p, where the sum runs over all particles and parton in the matrix element. The hard process calculations are performed at NLO with MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [36] with herwig6 subtraction terms and the TMD parton shower is simulated with Cascade3 [19]. The theoretical uncertainties are obtained by varying the scale of the hard process is varied by a factor 2 up and down, provided by MadGraph5 aMC@NLO. production cross sections measured by the ATLAS Collaboration at The experimental setup was as following: the transverse momenta of the leptons from the Z decay are required to be p or |η the jets by ∆R < 0.4. The invariant mass of the reconstructed Z-boson has to be within 76 < m and should have p ATLAS data [5]. The shaded bands represent the theoretical uncertainties estimated as described above. In all ﬁgures we show predictions (as described above) obtained from MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO based on a NLO calculation of Z + 1 jets with MadGraph5 aMC@NLO and TMD parton showers from Cascade3 with and without hadronization, together with predictions obtained from pegasus with and without parton shower. of the Z boson and the b jet rapidity and transverse momenta spectra at low and moderate aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO with and without fragmentation, we estimate the fragmentation correction of ∼ 10% in the larger transverse momentum regions, while at small p and small p from b-hadrons which are outside the jet with R = 0.4. Due to missing higher order contributions in the calculation (Z + 1 at NLO) there is a notable underestimation of the data at large transverse momenta, namely p contributions lead also to deviations at small ∆φ(Z, b), ∆R(Z, b) and at large ∆y(Z, b). tainties, failing though at large p heavy quark is produced in the hard partonic scattering at the amplitude level, is able to reproduce well the measured distributions in Z boson and b jet rapidity and transverse momenta (at low and moderate p of ∆φ(Z, b) is well described, even at low ∆φ(Z, b), which is in contrast with the PB result. One should however keep in mind that the pegasus calculations do not include fragmentation (unlike the PB ones). Taking into account the fragmentation eﬀect may result in a ∼ 10% drop of cross section [37]. The inclusion of the corresponding fragmentation correction factor could simultaneously result in better agreement by the two approaches. In the ∆y(Z, b) we observe a similar behavior as for the PB predictions. The ﬁnal state parton shower eﬀects does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the pegasus predictions. It can be easily understood since the main contributions here comes from initial state gluon radiation, which is already taken into account in the CCFM-evolved gluon density. production rate σ(Z +c)/σ(Z +b) as measured by the CMS collaboration at [3]. The experimental cuts are: the leading lepton from the Z decay is required to Now we are in position to present our numerical results. First we discuss Z + b√ | < 2.47 for electrons (excluding 1.37 < |η| < 1.52). The leptons are isolated from < 106. The jets are reconstructed in the anti-kalgorithm with radius R= 0.4 Our numerical predictions are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 in comparison with the latest The MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO calculations describe well the ATLAS measurements within the theoretical and experimental uncertainties. From the comparison of MG5- The pegasus predictions describe the data quite well within the estimated uncer- Now we turn to associated Z + c production at the LHC and discuss the relative√ Figure 1: Z + b production diﬀerential cross sections as functions of b-jet and Z-boson transverse momenta and rapidities at from [5]. have a transverse momentum p should be 71 < m ∆R < 0.4. The jets are required to have p with the anti-k function of Z boson or jet transverse momenta in comparison with the CMS data [3]. The shaded bands represent the estimated uncertainties of our calculations. A good description of the CMS data can be obtained with MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO The predictions from pegasus lie below the data, though being compatible with the data at ∼ 2σ. Thus, despite the fact that both considered scenario provide a more or less reasonable description of inclusive production data (see Figs. 1 and 2), they are very distinct for σ(Z+c)/σ(Z +b) observables and some correlation variables. The same conclusion was achieved earlier [7] when comparing the pegasus and sherpa (NLO pQCD) predictions, where the same heavy jet production scenario, as in the MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO is employed. Below we will discuss the kinematic criteria that can be helpful in discriminating these two cases. > 10 GeV; with pseudorapidities within |η| < 2.4 and the dilepton invariant mass In Fig. 3 we show the results of our calculations for the ratio σ(Z + c)/σ(Z + b) as a Figure 2: Z + b production diﬀerential cross sections as functions of the azimuthal angle, angular diﬀerence and rapidity diﬀerences between b-jet and Z-boson at ATLAS experimental data were taken from [5]. Figure 3: The relative production rate σ(Z + c)/σ(Z + b) as functions of heavy jet (left panel) and Z-boson (right panel) transverse momentum at tal data are from CMS [3]. on Z + b production, we turn to an investigation of observables sensitive to the diﬀerent sources of heavy jets. Here we concentrate mainly on b-jets, of course, the same arguments can be applied for charmed jets. B-hadrons tagged via the semileptonic decay B → µ + X: we consider the fractional energy z transverse momentum p distinguish between prompt b-production, where the b-quark exists already at the matrix element level, and non-prompt b-production, where the b-quark is generated during the jet evolution. We expect large z production, while non-prompt b-production would lead to signiﬁcantly smaller values for zand a larger tail for p transverse momentum: p momenta provide larger phase space for parton radiation cascades. Accordingly, they show a larger fraction of ‘non-prompt’ B-hadrons resulting in a larger fraction of lowenergy muons (muons with low z with large deviation from the jet direction). and non-prompt b production jets at LHC conditions. We investigated two diﬀerent schemes. quarks in ﬁnal states provides a consistent description of Z boson and/or b-jet transverse Since the two approaches considered above are suitable to describe latest LHC data In the following we consider kinematic properties of b-jet production by investigating carried by the decay muon with respect to the total b-jet energy and the muon In Fig. 4 the distribution of zand pare shown for diﬀerent thresholds of the jet We ﬁnd, that the intuitive variables zand pare very powerful to distinguish prompt We have considered the production of Z bosons associated with charm and beauty We ﬁnd that the combination of three basic subprocesses (1) – (3) involving heavy Figure 4: Z + b production diﬀerential cross sections as functions of the energy fraction carried by the decay muon with respect to the total b-jet energy and the muon transverse momentum with respect to the b-jet axis at momenta and rapidity distributions as well as diﬀerent correlation observables in Z + b events at low and moderate p model predictions obtained using the Monte-Carlo generator pegasus and recent LHC data. produced directly in the matrix element, or during the showering process. We perform the calculations based on the Parton Branching TMDs together with TMD shower for the initial state cascade. Such calculations were performed using MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO. We ﬁnd very good description of the measurement at not too large transverse momentum of the Z boson. ing whether the heavy quark is present at matrix element level or generated during the jet evolution. that can be seen, in particular, in relative production rate σ(Z +c)/σ(Z +b) measured very recently by the CMS Collaboration for the ﬁrst time. The ratio of c over b jet production is also reasonably well described by the PB prediction of MG5aMC+CA3(Z+1)NLO. transverse momenta contain larger fraction of non-prompt b-hadrons, that results in larger fraction of low-energy muons and in larger fraction of muons with large deviation from the jet direction. We recommend that the relevant observables, z forthcoming experimental analyses. S.P.B., A.V.L. and M.A.M. are grateful to DESY Directorate for the support in the framework of Cooperation Agreement between MSU and DESY on phenomenology of the LHC processes and TMD parton densities. M.A.M. was also supported by the grant of the of the jet. In another approach we consider Z+jet production at NLO, where heavy quarks can be We classify diﬀerent b-jet production mechanisms as prompt and non-prompt, depend- Events of the prompt and non-prompt types show rather diﬀerent kinematic properties, Considering the Z + b events as a representative example, we see that jets with larger We thank G.I. Lykasov and S.M. Turchikhin for important comments and remarks. Foundation for the Advancement of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics “BASIS” 20-13-11-1. STM thanks the Humboldt Foundation for the Georg Forster research fellowship.