October 20, 2021 Physique Atomique et Astrophysique, Université de Mons – UMONS, B-7000 Mons, Belgium e-mail: patrick.palmeri@umons.ac.be Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA Department of Physics, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008, USA Helmholtz Institut Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany Theoretisch Physikalisches Institut, Friedrich Schiller Universität Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany Dr. Karl Remeis-Observatory and Erlangen Centre for Astroparticle Physics, Sternwartstr. 7, 96049 Bamberg, Germany NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 662, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA IPNAS, Université de Liège, Sart Tilman, B-4000 Liège, Belgium Received ??; accepted ?? lines for all the ions belonging to the isonuclear sequences of abundant elements apart from oxygen and iron, namely: carbon, silicon, calcium, chromium, and nickel. These calculations are used to extend the data points for the ﬁts of the universal formulae, ﬁrst proposed in our fourth paper of this series, to predict the IP and K-threshold lowerings in any elemental ion. nucleus and electron-electron screenings with a time-averaged Debye-Hückel potential. and densities in the ranges of 10−10K and 10−10cm. In addition, the improved universal ﬁtting formulae are obtained. conditions is impractical, the use of these universal formulae for predicting the IP and K-threshold lowerings in plasma modeling codes is still recommended. However, their comparatively moderate to low accuracies may aﬀect the predicted opacities with regard to certain cases under extreme plasma conditions that are characterized by a plasma screening parameter of µ > 0.2 a.u., especially for the K-thresholds. Supersolar abundances have been inferred from K lines of different elements observed in the X-ray spectra of X-ray binaries (XRB) and active galactic nuclei (AGN) (see e.g., Kallman et al. (2009); Dong et al. (2020); Walton et al. (2020); Fukumura et al. (2021)). These absorption and emission features can occur in the inner regions of the black-hole accretion disks where the plasma densities are predicted to range from 10to 10cm (Schnittman et al. 2013). The emerging photons can be recorded with current space observatories such as XMM-Newton, NuSTAR, and Chandra. In addition, synthetic spectra can provide measures of the composition, temperature, and degree of ionization of the plasma (Ross & Fabian 2005; García & Kallman 2010). Nevertheless, the great majority of the atomic parameters used for spectral modeling that involves K-shell processes do not take density eﬀects into account and, therefore, their usefulness is comprised in abundance determinations beyond densities of 10cm(Smith & Brickhouse 2014). In a series of papers dedicated to plasma density eﬀects on the atomic parameters used to model K lines in ions of astrophysical interest, the ionization potentials (IPs), K-thresholds, transition wavelengths, radiative emission rates, and Auger widths have been computed with the relativistic multiconﬁguration Dirac–Fock (MCDF) method (Grant et al. 1980; McKenzie et al. 1980; Grant 1988), as implemented in the GRASP92 (Parpia et al. 1996) and RATIP (Fritzsche 2012) atomic structure packages. The plasma electron–nucleus and electron–electron screenings are approximated with a time-averaged Debye-Hückel (DH) potential. The datasets comprise the following ionic species: O i – O vii, by Deprince et al. (2019a, hereafter Paper I); Fe xvii – Fe xxv, by Deprince et al. (2019b, hereafter Paper II); Fe ix – Fe xvi, by Deprince et al. (2020a, hereafter Paper III); and Fe ii – Fe viii, by Deprince et al. (2020b, hereafter Paper IV). In this ﬁfth paper of the series, the universal ﬁtting formulae for ionization potential (IP) and K-threshold shifts proposed in Paper IV are improved thanks to subsequent MCDF/RATIP computations of these above-mentioned parameters in other representative cosmically abundant elements, namely: carbon (Z = 6), silicon (Z = 14), calcium (Z = 20), chromium (Z = 24), and nickel (Z = 28). These plasma eﬀects are expected to be the main ones with respect to the potential alteration of the ionization balance and opacities. In this section, we outline the main changes introduced in the MCDF formalism to take into account the density eﬀects in a weakly coupled plasma. Papers I–II and IV contain more details on this, along with tests of the validity of the method. The Debye-Hückel (DH) screened Dirac–Coulomb Hamiltonian (Saha & Fritzsche 2006) is expressed as: where r= |r− r| and the plasma screening parameter µ is the inverse of the Debye shielding length λ. The screening parameter can be given in atomic units (a.u.) in terms of the plasma electron density, n, and temperature, T, as For the typical plasma conditions in black-hole accretion disks, T∼ 10−10K and n∼ 10−10cm(Schnittman et al. 2013), the screening parameter µ falls in the interval: 0.0 ≤ µ ≤ 0.24 a.u. The DH screening theory is only valid for a weakly coupled plasma where its thermal energy dominates its electrostatic energy. This can be parameterized by the plasma coupling parameter Γ, deﬁned as: where Zis the average plasma ionic charge or ionization: with nas the number density of an ion, i, of an element, X, bearing a positive charge, z, and d as a measurement of the interparticle distance: The plasma neutrality implies: and therefore Eqs. (4) and (5) can be rewritten as: For a fully ionized hydrogen plasma with Z= 1, the plasma coupling parameter, considering typical conditions in accretion disks, is well below 1 falling in the interval 0.0003 ≤ Γ ≤ 0.3 which is characteristic of a weakly coupled plasma. Furthermore, for a more realistic cosmological plasma with a mixture of 90% hydrogen and 10% of helium by number (both fully ionized), the average plasma ionization would be Z= 0.9 + 2 × 0.1 = 1.1. Hence, the above interval limits on the plasma coupling parameter would have to be multiplied by a Article number, page 2 of 11 factor Z∼ 1.07 and would still agree with a weakly coupled plasma (see our Paper IV for further details). In the present study, the active space (AS) method was used in order to obtain the MCDF multiconﬁgurational expansions for the all the ionization stages of the isonuclear sequences of C, Si, Ca, Cr, and Ni, analogously to those of O and Fe in the recent past (see Papers I–IV). This method consists of exciting the electrons from the reference conﬁgurations to a given active set of orbitals. For almost all the ions studied in this work, the AS was built by considering all the single and double excitations from some reference conﬁgurations (always including the ground ones) up to the n = 3 orbitals (when only K- and L-shell electrons are involved in the ground conﬁguration) or up to the n = 3 and 4s orbitals (when K-, L-, and M-shell electrons are involved in the ground conﬁguration). The reference conﬁgurations were taken as the ground one along with those obtained by considering single electron excitations leaving a single hole in the 1s, 2p, and 3p orbitals (when involved in the ground conﬁguration). In some cases, namely for the ions close to the neutral end (i.e., for Ni i – Ni iv, Cr i – Cr ii, Ca i – Ca ii, Si i – Si ii), only single excitations from the reference conﬁgurations were considered. In Table 1, we report for each ion grouped by number of electrons, N, the reference conﬁgurations, the active orbital sets and the ﬁnal numbers of conﬁguration state functions (CSF),Φ, generated to build the atomic state functions (ASF), Ψ , in the MCDF expansions as: where care the mixing coeﬃcients. The computations were carried out with the extended average level (EAL) option, optimizing a weighted trace of the Hamiltonian using level weights proportional to 2J + 1, and they were completed with the inclusion of the relativistic twobody Breit interaction and the quantum electrodynamic corrections (QED) due to self-energy and vacuum polarization. The MCDF ionic bound states generated by the GRASP92 code were then used in the RATIP program to compute the atomic structures diagonalizing the DH screened Dirac–Coulomb Hamiltonian (Eq. (1)), from which were then obtained the ionization potential and the K-shell threshold energies. Plasma environment eﬀects are computed for a Debye screening parameter in the range 0 ≤ µ ≤ 0.25 a.u. In Tables A.1–A.5, the MCDF/RATIP ionization potentials (IPs) are reported for plasma screening parameters µ = 0.0 a.u., that is, in the isolated atom case, µ = 0.1 a.u., and µ = 0.25 a.u., along with the corresponding values recommended by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (Kramida et al. 2020, NIST), respectively, for carbon, silicon, calcium, chromium, and nickel. The diﬀerences between our theoretical values for µ = 0 a.u. and the NIST IPs are on average within ∼ ±3 eV. In terms of relative diﬀerences, they can span from less than a few % for the highly-charged ions, that is, with Z= Z − N + 1 > 10 where Zis the eﬀective charge and N is the number of bound electrons, up to 22 % in Ni i and 38% in Cr i. The latter is the result of numerical diﬃculties in computing the complex atomic structures involving half-ﬁlled 3d subshell and in neutral ends of isonuclear sequences in iron group elements such as chromium Table 1. Reference conﬁgurations and active orbital sets used to build up the MCDF active space by single and double electron excitations to the corresponding active orbital sets along with the number of conﬁguration state functions (CSFs), N carbon, silicon, calcium, chromium, and nickel ions with N = 2 − 28 electrons. 2 C v, Si xiii, Ca xix, Cr xxiii, Ni xxvii 1s 3 C iv, Si xii, Ca xviii, Cr xxii, Ni xxvi 1s2s, 1s2p, 1s2s, 1s2s2p, 1s2p Notes.[n`] means a hole in the n` subshell.Only single excitations were considered. and nickel, where the three lower even-parity conﬁgurations 3d, 3d4s, and 3d4soverlap and are highly mixed. Figure 1 shows the IP, Ein eV, in logarithmic scale as function of Z, for ions belonging to nickel isonuclear sequence chosen as an example. The MCDF/RATIP IPs calculated in this work for µ = 0, 0.1 and 0.25 a.u. are plotted along with the corresponding recommended values of NIST (Kramida et al. 2020). The latter are to be compared with our calculations in the isolated atom case, namely, for µ = 0 a.u. The NIST error bars are too small to be seen in the ﬁgure. We can observe that all four curves follow the same trend with the curves for µ = 0.1 a.u. and µ = 0.25 a.u., systematically downshifted with respect to both the NIST and the isolated-atom case ones. Also, two big jumps are seen between Z= 26 and Z= 27 and between Z= 18 and Z= 19. These correspond to respectively the transition from the closure of the K-shell and the starting of the ﬁlling of the L-shell, and the transition from the closure of the Lshell and the starting of the ﬁlling of the M-shell. These features are similar to the ones observed in the oxygen (Paper I) and iron isonuclear sequences (Papers II-IV). In Figure 2, the MCDF/RATIP IP shift, ∆E= E(µ) − E(µ = 0) in eV, with respect to the isolated atom plasma condition (µ = 0 a.u.) is plotted as function of the eﬀective charge in the same example (Ni i–Ni xxvii) for plasma screen parameters 2p, 1s2s2p, 1s2p 2p, 1s2s2p, 1s2p , 1s2s2p, 1s2s2p, 1s2p , 1s2s2p, 1s2s2p, 1s2p , 1s2s2p, 1s2s2p Fig. 1. Ionization potential, Ein eV, in logarithmic scale as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. The NIST error bars are too small to appear in the ﬁgure. of 0.1 a.u. and 0.25 a.u. It can be seen that this quantity varies linearly with Zwith steeper slope for larger µ. Moreover, it has also a linear trend with the plasma screening parameter as displayed for the nickel ions in Figure 3. This is in agreement with the corresponding Debye-Hückel (DH) limit (Stewart & Pyatt 1966; Crowley 2014). This is also shown in Figure 2 as solid and dashed lines as given below: ∆E= −27.2116 µ Z where ∆Eis in eV and µ in a.u. Besides, closed-shell eﬀects are clearly marked in Figure 2 for µ = 0.25 a.u. with small departures from the DH limit at Z= 18 and 26. Fig. 2. Ionization potential shift, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. Circles: MCDF/RATIP method for µ = 0.1 a.u. Squares: MCDF/RATIP method for µ = 0.25 a.u. Solid line: Debye-Hückel limit for µ = 0.1 a.u. Dashed line: Debye-Hückel limit for µ = 0.25 a.u. Fig. 3. MCDF/RATIP ionization potential shift, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter µ in a.u., in some ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. The K-threshold energies, Ein eV, computed in this work using the MCDF/RATIP method are reported in Tables B.1-B.5 for plasma screening parameters µ = 0 a.u. (isolated atomic system), µ = 0.1 a.u., and µ = 0.25 a.u. for respectively the carbon, silicon, calcium, chromium, and nickel isonuclear sequences. These values are plotted as function of the eﬀective charge in Figure 4 for our example of the nickel ions Ni i–Ni xxvii. As for the IPs, all the three curves follow the same trend with systematic lowerings with respect to the isolated atom systems (µ = 0 a.u.). A gradient change is also seen at Z= 19 corresponding to the closure of the L-shell and opening of the M-shell. In addition, as shown in Figures 5–6 for the nickel isonuclear sequence, the K-threshold energy shift, ∆E= E(µ) − E(µ = 0) in eV, with respect to the isolated atom condition (µ = 0 a.u.) displays a linear dependence on both the eﬀective charge and the plasma screening parameter, in agreement with our results in oxygen (Paper I) and iron (Papers II–IV) ions. Article number, page 4 of 11 Fig. 4. MCDF/RATIP K-threshold energy, Ein eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. Fig. 5. MCDF/RATIP K-threshold energy shift, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. Fig. 6. MCDF/RATIP K-threshold shift, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter, µ in a.u., in some ions belonging to the nickel isonuclear sequence. The aim of the present work is to reﬁne the universal formulae ﬁrst provided in our Paper IV. In order to do so, we have extended the number of diﬀerent isonuclear sequences used in the ﬁtting of the coeﬃcients multiplying the µ Zfactor by including the MCDF/RATIP IP and K-threshold shifts reported in the previous section for C i–C v, Si i–Si xiii, Ca i–Ca xix, Cr i–Cr xxiii and Ni i–Ni xxvii. The resulting ﬁtting formulae for the IP and Kthreshold lowerings, ∆Eand ∆E, respectively, in eV, are given below: ∆E= (−27.27 ± 0.05) µ Z which are close to the Debye-Hückel limit (Stewart & Pyatt 1966; Crowley 2014), as shown in Eq. (10) and as was already the case in Paper IV. The coeﬃcients that appear in Eqs. (11), (12) are more constrained by the ﬁts reducing the standard deviation by a factor of ∼2 with respect to those of Paper IV, where only the iron and oxygen isonuclear sequences were considered in the adjustments. Here, it has to be emphasized that the standard deviations of the ﬁtting parameters are obtained by considering equal weights for the data points used in the ﬁts, i.e., the calculated MCDF/RATIP values are supposed to be exact. The idea is to provide formulae that reproduce our MCDF/RATIP models almost exactly, at least at the resolution of present and future instruments. In Figures 7 and 8, we display the resulting ﬁts to the MCDF/RATIP IP lowerings computed in this work and in Papers I–IV, respectively, as a function of the eﬀective charge and of the plasma screening parameter. In Figure 8, we restrict the plot to a sample of eﬀective charges for the sake of clarity. Figures 9 and 10 are the equivalents for the K-threshold energy shifts. In Figure 11 and Figure 12, comparisons between computed and ﬁtted values are presented for ∆Eand ∆E, respectively. The latter all show a sound reliability, although some minor scatter appears especially for µ = 0.25 a.u. In order to investigate further, the diﬀerences between the predicted values given by the formulae (11) and (12) and the MCDF/RATIP values are plotted versus the eﬀective charge, the plasma screening parameter and the MCDF/RATIP value in the bottom panels of, respectively, Figures 7 and 9 as well as Figures 8 and 10 as well as Figures 11 and 12, for the IP and K-threshold lowerings, respectively. As we see, the diﬀerences range from up to 5 eV to less than 1 eV in the bottom panel of Figure 7 and from up to 9 eV to less than 1 eV in the bottom panel of Figure 9 with bigger diﬀerences for µ = 0.25 a.u. and with agreements within ∼2 eV for µ = 0.1 a.u. The average of the absolute diﬀerences are 1.2±1.2 eV and 1.1±1.6 eV respectively for the IP and Kthreshold lowerings. Moreover, these average diﬀerences drop to 0.6±0.5 eV and 0.3±0.3 eV, respectively, when only the values for µ = 0.1 a.u are considered and increase up to 1.8±1.3 eV and 2.0±1.9 eV, respectively, when only the values for µ = 0.25 eV are retained this time. All the ﬁgures are to be compared to the resolve energy scale of the microcalorimeter onboard the future XRISM mission, that is, 2 eV with a goal of 1 eV (Miller et al. 2020). In that respect, the IP and K-threshold lowering diﬀerences for µ = 0.1 a.u shown in the bottom panels of Figures 7-12 are all within ± ∼ 2 eV, which is comparable to the XRISM resolve energy scale. In contrast, a large number of the values for µ = 0.25 a.u are greater than this scale, as notably seen in the bottom panels of Figures 8 and 10. In trying to reproduce the direct MCDF/RATIP calculations more accurately with the ﬁtted formulae, we used a diﬀerent ﬁtted formula for each shell ﬁlling, namely: K-shell ions (C v, O vi, Si xiii, Ca xix, Cr xxiii, Fe xxv, and Ni xxvii), L-shell ions (C i– C iv, O i–O v, Si v–Si xii, Ca xi–Ca xviii, Cr xv–Cr xxii, Fe xvii– Fe xxiv, and Ni xix–Ni xxvi), and M-shell ions (Si i–Si iv, Ca iii– Ca x, Cr i–Cr xiv, Fe ii–Fe xvi, and Ni i–Ni xviii). The resulting ﬁtted formulae are the following: Fig. 7. Top: Ionization potential lowering, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in several abundant ions. Solid line: ﬁtting formula (11) for µ = 0.1 a.u. Dashed line: ﬁtting formula (11) for µ = 0.25 a.u. Colored symbols: MCDF/RATIP method. Bottom: Diﬀerences between universal formula’s ionization potential lowerings and MCDF/RATIP values, (∆E( f ormula) − ∆E(MCDF/RAT IP)) in eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in several abundant ions. Dashed line: straightline of equality. Dotdashed lines: straight lines of ±1 eV diﬀerences. ∆E= (−27.01 ± 0.03) µ Z for the K-shell ions; ∆E= (−27.07 ± 0.01) µ Z for the L-shell ions; ∆E= (−27.92 ± 0.11) µ Z for the M-shell ions. The corresponding diﬀerences with respect to the MCDF/RATIP values are all within 1 eV for formulae (13) and (14) for the K-shell ions. For the L-shell ions, they are also all within ∼ 1 eV for K-threshold lowerings given by formula (16) but they scatter more, namely, within ∼3 eV for the IP lowerings (Eq. (15), essentiallydue to the µ = 0.25 a.u. values in C ii–C iv, O iv–O vi, and Si xi–Si xii. Regarding the M-shell ions, formulae (17) and (18) predict values that diﬀer from the Fig. 8. Top: Ionization potential lowering, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter, µ in a.u., in several abundant ions. Colored lines: Fitting formula (11). Colored symbols: MCDF/RATIP method. Bottom: Diﬀerences between universal formula’s ionization potential lowerings and MCDF/RATIP values, (∆E( f ormula) − ∆E(MCDF/RAT IP)) in eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter, µ, in several abundant ions. Dashed line: straightline of equality. Dotdashed lines: straight lines of ±1 eV diﬀerences. MCDF/RATIP calculations by up to ∼7.5 eV (in Cr i under conditions parametrized by µ = 0.25 a.u.) for the K-threshold lowerings and up to ∼3 eV (in Si iv under conditions parametrized by µ = 0.25 a.u.) for the IP lowerings. These do not therefore solve the problem of better accuracy compared to the resolve energy scale attained by future x-ray space telescopes. In conclusion, the universal formulae (11) and (12) are of equivalent accuracy then the shell speciﬁc formulae (13–18) but of more of practical use for the astrophysical plasma modeling codes such as xstar (Bautista & Kallman 2001; Kallman & Bautista 2001; Kallman et al. 2021; Mendoza et al. 2021). Finally, we used the MCDF/RATIP values calculated in the oxygen isonuclear sequence for µ = 0.2 a.u. in Paper IV for comparison with the predictions given by the ﬁtting formulae, namely, Eqs. (11), (12), and we ﬁnd a good agreement, as can be seen in Figure 13. Here, the absolute diﬀerences range from ∼0.1 eV (in O i) to ∼1.6 eV (in O vi) for the IP lowerings and from ∼0.05 eV (in O iii) to ∼0.9 eV (in O i) for the K-threshold lowerings. At this point, we can conclude that our ﬁtted formulae reproduce our MCDHF/RATIP models with an accuracy comparable to the XRISM resolve energy scale for plasma screening parameter values µ ≤ 0.2 a.u. We ﬁrst proposed universal formulae applicable to all relevant elements in order to predict IP and K-threshold lowerings that are due to the screening eﬀect on atomic systems embedded in plasmas (our Paper IV). In an attempt to improve them, Article number, page 6 of 11 Fig. 9. Top: K-threshold lowering, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the effective charge, Z, in several abundant ions. Solid line: Fitting formula (12) for µ = 0.1 a.u. Dashed line: ﬁtting formula (12) for µ = 0.25 a.u. Colored symbols: MCDF/RATIP method. Bottom: Diﬀerences between universal formula’s K-threshold energy lowerings and MCDF/RATIP values, (∆E( f ormula) − ∆E(MCDF/RAT IP)) in eV, as a function of the eﬀective charge, Z, in several abundant ions. Dashed line: straight line of equality. Dotted-dashed lines: Straight lines of ±1 eV diﬀerences. MCDF/RATIP calculations of IP and K-threshold energies have been carried out in the carbon, silicon, calcium, chromium, and nickel isonuclear sequences in order to increase the number of data points that can be used in the ﬁts. The theoretical models used are based on the multiconﬁguration Dirac-Fock method that includes a Debye-Hückel model potential to take into account the eﬀects of the plasma screening on atomic structures. In each sequence, the MCDF/RATIP IP and K-threshold downshifts show similar linear trends on both the ion eﬀective charge and the plasma screening parameter as the ones previously reported in oxygen and iron isonuclear sequences in, respectively, our Paper I and our Papers II–IV. Concerning the improved universal formulae, namely those of Eqs. (11) and (12), the coeﬃcients of proportionality closed to the Debye-Hückel limit are more constrained by the ﬁts, reducing the standard deviations by a factor two with respect to those determined in Paper IV. Nonetheless, diﬀerences with the MCDF/RATIP values are still found to be sizable compared to the XRISM resolve energy scale (2 eV) in certain ions near the neutral end of isonuclear sequences or in atomic structures close to closed-shell atoms and for extreme plasma conditions, that is, for µ = 0.25 a.u. Actually, discontinuities appear in the diﬀerent trends and increase with µ, reﬂecting the shell structure of the diﬀerent atomic systems. Considering these discontinuities by using diﬀerent ﬁtting curves for each shell ﬁlling does not solve this issue of accuracy. Fig. 10. Top: K-threshold lowering, ∆Ein eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter, µ in a.u., in several abundant ions. Colored lines: ﬁtting formula (12). Colored symbols: MCDF/RATIP method. Bottom: Diﬀerences between universal formula’s K-threshold energy lowerings and MCDF/RATIP values, (∆E( f ormula) − ∆E(MCDF/RAT IP)) in eV, as a function of the plasma screening parameter, µ, in several abundant ions. Dashed line: Straight line of equality. Dotted-dashed lines: Straight lines of ±1 eV diﬀerences. In conclusion, as explicit calculations of the atomic structures for each ion of each element under diﬀerent plasma conditions is impractical, we still recommend the use of universal formulae, namely, Equations (11–12) for predicting the IP and K-threshold lowerings in plasma modeling codes such as xstar (Bautista & Kallman 2001; Kallman & Bautista 2001; Kallman et al. 2021; Mendoza et al. 2021), although their comparatively moderate to low accuracies in certain cases under extreme plasma conditions characterized by µ > 0.2 a.u. (especially for the K-thresholds) may aﬀect the predicted opacities.