Astronomy Reports, 2021, Vol. 65, No. 10 theory have given rise to the study of various modiﬁed gravity t heories. While most of these modiﬁcations depart from the formulation of general relativity in terms of the curvature of the Levi-Civita connection of the spacetime metric, alternative formulations in terms of the torsion or nonmetricity of a ﬂa t connection have received recent interest [ on theories which arise as modiﬁcations of the symmetric teleparallel equivalent of general relativity (STEGR) [ as the mediator of gravity. Notable contender theories include newer general relativity [ f(Q) theories [ parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism [ bative expansion of the metric tensor, and possibly ot her ﬁelds, around a vacuum solution to the gravitational ﬁeld equations, which is usually performed in a particularly chosen reference frame. In practice, this may lead to diﬃculties, since the chosen reference frame is fully determined only after solving the ﬁeld equations. In order to address this issue, a gaugeinvariant approach to the PPN formalism ha s been developed [ nonlinear gauge transformations [ Taylor expansion of tensor ﬁelds [ proven to be useful in its application to perturbations in more than one variable [16, 17] as well as to higher order gauge-invariant cosmological perturbation theory [ itational interaction are assumed to be a metric or a tetrad, which is understood as a Lorentz-valued covector ﬁeld, and possibly other tensor ﬁelds; an example with a scalar ﬁeld has been worked out [ or metric-aﬃne theories of gravity, a connection appears in the role of a gravitational ﬁeld variable. Since connections transform diﬀerently from tensor ﬁelds under diﬀeomorphisms, which lie at the heart of the gauge-invariant perturbation theory, the question arises how these may be incorporated into the ga uge-invariant PPN formalism. The a im of this article is to demonstrate this in case of the ﬂat, torsion-free co nnection present in symmetric teleparallel gravity theories. The open questions in cosmology and the tensions between general relativity and quantum An important tool for testing the validity of such modiﬁed g ravity theories is the In the gauge-invariant PPN formalism, the fundamental ﬁelds which mediate the gravpreliminaries. The gauge-invariant PPN formalism is displayed in section introduction to symmetric teleparallel gravity is given in section formalism; see [ that physical ﬁelds, such as the metric g which is not equipped with any coordinates or background ﬁelds. The latter are deﬁned only on a model manifold M these diﬀerent manifolds and tensors ﬁelds deﬁned on them, one must make use of a gauge, i.e., a diﬀeomorphism X : M of the metric and other tensor ﬁelds to the background manifold M is then regarded as a perturbation of the background metric g formalism, this background manifold M the background metric g i.e., changes from one gauge X to another gauge Y: actively, as a change of the pullback tensor ﬁelds as expressing the same tensor ﬁeld g up to the fourth order, where the order parameter is the velocity of the source matter, and only certain components of these perturbations are relevant and non-vanishing; see [ for a full exposition. These perturbation components are then expressed in terms of Poissonlike integrals over the source matter variables (called the PPN potentials), with constant coeﬃcients ( called the PPN parameters). The latter depend on the gr avity theory under consideration, and can be used to confront this theory with observations. Before presenting the main construction in this article, we brieﬂy review the necessary We start with a brief review of the essential ingredients of the gauge-invariant PPN Besides the pullback of tensor ﬁelds from M to M, a gauge X also induces coordinates = x◦ X) on M. This allows for two diﬀerent viewpoints of gauge transformations, Perturbations of the metric and other tensor ﬁelds in a given gauge are deﬁned as sence of certain PPN potentials from the perturbations PPN formalism, however, makes use of a diﬀerent gauge S, which is deﬁned by the purely geometric conditions that metric perturbation into irreducible components then implies that its non-vanishing components are gauge-invariant. These gauge-invariant components are denoted with boldface letters, dynamical gravitational ﬁeld variable, in addition to the metric g assumed to be ﬂat and torsion-f ree, hence The dynamics for the fundamental ﬁeld variables are encoded in the nonmetricity, or equivalently the disformation tensors, deﬁned by which are in g eneral non-vanishing. In t erms of the latt er, the action for STEGR reads with gravitational constant κ is no direct coupling between the symmetric teleparallel connection and matter ﬁelds, so that the gravitational action is supplemented with a matter action S on the metric g assumption [20], here we choose to retain it, as it g uar antees that the trajectories of test bodies will be given by the geodesics of the metric, which is an important a ssumption of t he PPN formalism, and provides the link between the PPN parameters and observations [ gravity theories. First, we discuss the gauge transformation of connections in section In the classical PPN f ormalism, a standard gauge P is used, which is deﬁned by the abg≡g. We will employ the same convention here. In symmetric teleparallel gravity, one considers a connection with coeﬃcients Γas We now extend the gauge-invariant PPN formalism to the case of symmetric teleparallel We then construct gauge-invaria nt perturbation variables for the symmetric teleparallel connection in section III B, which we then express in PPN potentials in section III C. formations of tensor ﬁelds [13, 14]. The coeﬃcients of a connection, however, do not form a tensor ﬁeld. Their gauge transformations can most easily be understood f r om the passive interpretation of diﬀeomorphisms as coordinate changes, from which follows that a connection transforms by the well-known formula In the perturbative a pproach, the gauge transformation is parametrized by a sequence of vector ﬁelds Performing a perturbative expansion of the ﬁnite coordinate transformation ( tor ﬁelds ξ, and considering the connection to be given as a perturbation around a given background which are formally identical to the gauge transformation of tensor components, with the only exception arising from the fact that the Lie derivative of a connection receives an additional contribution from the inhomogeneous term in the transformation ( This Lie derivative ( tives are simply obtained by the usual homogeneous Lie derivative formula. conditions that it is ﬂat and symmetric, is the existence of a gauge C, called the coincident The original gauge-invariant PPN formalism [1 2] is based on the theory of gauge trans- An important property of the symmetric teleparallel connection, which follows from the gauge [3], in which its connection coeﬃcients va nish identically, condition does not determine the coincident gauge uniquely; any other gauge related by a linear coordinate tr ansformation with constant x coincident gauges agrees with either the distinguished gauge S with respect to which the gauge-invariant metric perturbations are deﬁned, nor with the standard PPN gauge P. However, we will make the assumption that there exists a coincident gauge C which is related to these gauges by a gauge transformation which preserves the PPN order of perturbations. This assumption is justiﬁed by its implication that the resulting nonmetricity and disformation tensors, which enter the gravitational ﬁeld equations, will then be of PPN order, with a common vacuum solution given by the ﬁeld equations becomes of the same order as the energy-momentum side. It thus follows that the vector ﬁeld C, which relates the coincident gauge C to the distinguished gauge S, is described by the only relevant and non- vanishing components From t he deﬁning property mation ( then follows that in the distinguished gauge the symmetric teleparallel connection reads which can also easily be derived from the ﬁnite transformation law ( coeﬃcients and series expansion of the coordinate transformation ( appearance of derivatives of second order in the relations ( formations of the form (9) indeed constitute a freedom in the choice of the coincident gauge. However, this residual gauge freedom is ﬁxed by the demand that the gauge transforming vector ﬁeld C tions. Hence, this condition uniquely ﬁxes a coincident gauge. The components (10) of t he gauge deﬁning vector ﬁeld thus constitute the perturbative expansion of the g auge-invariant 7) with Y = C, X = S and ξ = C (or, equivalently, Y = S, X = C and ξ = −C), symmetric teleparallel connection coeﬃcients Γ ant metric components g the notation to use boldface letters C deﬁning vector ﬁeld C connection in the distinguished gauge S, in terms of the PPN potentials. For this purpose we recall that the non-vanishing components of t he energy-momentum tensor in the same gauge, up to the relevant perturbation orders, are given by [ This must be compared with the corresp onding components of the gravitational side of the ﬁeld equations of a g iven symmetric teleparallel gravity theory under consideration. Following section tives, as well as p ossibly other tensor ﬁelds which are present in t he gravitational action. Here we aim for a generic discussion, and consider only the most simple cases. Expanding the nonmetricity tensor based on its deﬁnition ( metric and symmetric teleparallel connection yields the non-vanishing components at the second velocity or der, as well as at the third velocity order, where the metric perturbations are conventionally assumed to be of the form Here γ and α and the PPN potentials can be obtained as the solutions to the Poisson-like equations We ﬁnally come t o the question how to express the relevant components (10) of the gauge Relevant terms for the metric ﬁeld equations of symmetric teleparallel gravity theories, which are symmetric rank-two tensor equations by construction, can be obtained either by considering products of nonmetricity terms, which ar e t hen at least of fourth velocity order, or derivatives of the nonmetricity. At the lowest orders, o nly the latter appear. Calculating all terms of this type, one ﬁnds at the second velocity order the terms which are three scalars and ﬁve symmetric spatial two-tensors. Together with the expansion ( equations at the second velocity order can be brought into the generic form where the coeﬃcients a Hence, they can be solved by an ansatz of the form where the unknown constant k alongside t he PPN parameter γ, which is implicitly contained in the constants b the ansatz ( the nonmetricity terms to be taken into account are the vectors Inserting all metric and energy-momentum terms, as well as the second-order solution ( obtained in the preceding step, one ﬁnds that the third-o rder ﬁeld equations can be brought into the generic fo r m where the coeﬃcients a equations are to be solved. One thus ﬁnds that a solution can be obtained from the ansatz The third-order ﬁeld equations ( pure divergence, while the right hand side, using the deﬁnitions ( 12) of the energy-momentum tensor and (15) of the metric, one ﬁnds that the ﬁeld where the la st term is also a pure divergence, while V quence of the post-Newtonian conservation of energy-momentum. Hence, these two components decouple, and the independent coeﬃcient equations determine the PPN parameter α equation through the metric ( then be used to derive a nd solve the fourth-order ﬁeld equations. We will not display this general procedure here, since a signiﬁcantly larger number of terms which are quadratic in second-order perturbations must be included, which would exceed the scope of this ar t icle. formalism [ connection next to the metric as a fundamental ﬁeld variable mediating the gr avitational interaction. For this purpose, we have studied the behavior of the connection under gaug e transformations, and devised a decomposition into gauge-invariant perturbation variables. Further, we have shown how the perturbations at the second and third velocity orders can be expressed in terms of well-known PPN potentials. Deriving similar expressions for the fourth velocity order is straightf orward. The formulas obtained from these calculations can then immediately be applied in order to determine the post-Newtonian limit of various modiﬁed symmetric teleparallel gravity theories [ involving connections as fundamenta l dynamical ﬁelds may be considered. through the Personal Research Funding project PRG356, as well as the European Regional Development Fund through t he Center of Excellence TK133 “The Dark Side of the Universe”. We have presented an extension of the gauge-invar ia nt parametrized post-Newtonian The author g r atefully acknowledges the full support by the Estonian Research Council