<title>Decision support system for distributed manufacturing based on input–output analysis  and economic complexity </title> The disruption of supplies during the Covid-19 crisis has led to shortages but has also shown the adaptability of  some  companies,  which  have  succeeded  in  adapting  their  production  chains  quickly  to  produce  goods  experiencing shortages: hydroalcoholic gel, masks, and medical gowns. These productive jumps from product A  to product B are feasible because of the know-how proximity between the two classes of products. The proximities  were computed from the analysis of co-exports and resulted in the construction of the product space.  Based  on  the  product  space,  as  well  as  the  customer–supplier  relationships  resulting  from the input–output  matrices, we propose a recommender system for companies. The goal is to promote distributed manufacturing by  recommending a list of local suppliers to each company. As there is not always a local supplier for a desired  product class, we consider the proximity between products to identify, in the absence of a supplier, a substitute  supplier able to adapt its production tools to provide the required product. Our experiments are based on French  data, from which we build a graph of synergies illustrating the potential productive links between companies.  Finally,  we  show  that  our  approach  offers  new  perspectives  to  determine  the  level  of  territories’  industrial  resilience considering potential productive jumps.  1  INTRODUCTION  Many  countries  are  seeking  to  rebuild  their  production  systems,  which  have  been  damaged  by  years  of  relocation.  The  recent  crisis  has  shown  the  importance  of  countries  and  their  territories  maintaining  and  developing  industrial  know-how.  At  the  same  time,  environmental  and  societal  issues  are  becoming  more  prevalent  and  require  short  circuits,  thus  favoring  distributed  manufacturing  models.  Public  authorities  and  companies  would  like  to  promote  local  synergies,  like  customer–supplier  relationships,  to  model  resilient  production ecosystems.   The availability of open data in economics offers new perspectives on the design of decision support tools. In  this study, we formalize a recommender system for companies to guide them in their search for local suppliers.  We start by presenting the research work that provides the foundation for this study. Based on this analysis, we  detail our original decision support system, which exploits both data from input–output models and productive  jumps. We see that it is possible to use economic complexity to determine proximities between classes of products  and thus make recommendations for productive jumps that firms can make. These productive jumps represent the  capacity of a firm that already produces a type A product to produce a type B product with a slight adaptation of  its production tools.  We test our models on the French production system, providing each firm with a list of potential suppliers.  Finally, we conclude by reflecting on the perspectives offered by this new approach regarding the relocation of  know-how and the development of distributed manufacturing. We discuss the interest in considering productive  jumps in an indicator of territorial productive resilience.  2.1 Input–output analysis  Input–output analysis uses input–output tables to study the interactions between economic sectors. Leontief  (1936) developed a model linking the intermediate production and the final consumption for different industries.  The model has been applied to supply chains (Albino et al., 2002, 2011; Doll & Shaffer, 2007; Lee & Yoo, 2016;  Seetharaman et al., 2003; Yu, 2018) and the maritime domain (Huang et al., 2015; Morrissey & O’Donoghue,  2013). Yu (2018) presents a review of use cases in both single-region and multi-region modes.  The structure is presented in Table 1. IO tables describe the intermediate demand between each industrial sector,  components of the final demand, import ratios for all the components, value added, tax, subsidies, and gross output  per industrial sector.  Let   be the amount of the final demand of sector . Then, the output of sector , named  , is determined as  follows:  Tables are published by national or international statistics institutes, like Eurostat or the Bureau of Economic  Analysis (US).  2.2 Economic complexity  The concept of economic complexity developed by Hausmann and Hidalgo (2010), Hidalgo and Hausmann  (2006, 2009), and Hidalgo et al. (2007) is based on the analysis of trade between countries. By observing the  exports  of  a country, we can measure  its productive  know-how. This productive know-how is  the key to  a  country’s economic prosperity and may require a complex network of specific skills acquired over several years.  A country’s economic complexity indicator (ECI) is an indicator of the complexity of its productive know-how.  The underlying idea behind the concept of economic complexity is that the evolution of a country’s productive  know-how takes place progressively by “jumping” from the manufacture of one type of product to another type  of product that is close to it in the product space.  Numerous applications of the concept of economic complexity are dedicated to global analysis (Hidalgo et al.,  2007), sub-national analysis (Balsalobre & Verduras, 2017; Balsalobre et al., 2019; Reynolds et al., 2018), or  societal analysis (Ben Saâd & Assoumou-Ella, 2019; Ferraz et al., 2018; Hartmann et al., 2017; Lapatinas, 2016;  Le Caous & Huarng, 2020; Lee & Vu, 2020; Morais et al., 2018; Sbardella et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017)0. Other  works analyze growth (02014), sustainability (Fraccascia et al., 2018; Hamwey et al., 2013; Huberty & Zachmann,  2011; Mealy & Teytelboym, 2020; Perruchas et al., 2020), diversification capacities  (Alshamsi et al., 2018;  Boschma & Capone, 2015; Pachot et al., 2021a, 2021b; Zhu et al., 2017), or the impact of public policies (Marrocu  et al., 2020; Uhlbach et al., 2017).  Based on the large-scale analysis of the types of products exported by countries, researchers are able to measure  the proximity of productive know-how between each type of product and construct a graph of products named the  product space (Hidalgo & Hausmann, 2009). The results obtained for each country can be consulted in the Atlas  of Economic Complexity. In the following formulas, country  is considered to export product  if and only if   is greater than 1.  For example, in 2019, wine accounted for 0.136% of world trade (33.8 billion), with total world exports of $24,795  billion. Of this total, Georgia exported nearly $193 million worth of wine. Georgia’s total exports for that year  amounted to $7.81 billion, of which wine accounted for 2.47%. Georgian wine thus represents 0.57% of wine  exports in the world, while Georgian exports of all products combined represent 0.03% of the world exports. We  obtain a revealed competitive advantage (RCA) of 18.12 for wine in Georgia, which means that Georgia exports  18.12 times its fair share of wine exports, so we can say that Georgia has a significant revealed competitive  advantage for wine.  The calculation of the productive proximity between products is undertaken by looking for each pair of products    exported together:  3  MODELIZATION  Our decision support system is organized around three processes: the identification of facilities in a territory,  the search for potential suppliers for them, and finally the search for alternative suppliers.  3.1 Identification of facilities in a territory from open data  From the open data on facilities available in many countries, we can perform mapping work to represent each  facility on its territory. Based on its postal address, we can then use geolocation services to obtain the GPS  coordinates of the facility.   It is possible to download the data sets directly from the competent organizations in the different countries or  to  use  a  platform  such  as  opencorporates.com,   which  aggregates  open  data  relating  to  more  than  200,000  companies and 276,000 facilities located in a hundred different countries. The facilities are associated with an  industry  code  linked  to  their  main  activity.  Depending  on  the  country,  conversions  of  economic  activity  nomenclature are necessary. The Ramon and Unstat  websites offer numerous tables of correspondence between  nomenclatures.  3.2 Looking for potential suppliers for each facility based on input–output matrices  For each facility in a territory, we wish to identify the presence of potential suppliers. Potential suppliers are  facilities  of  which  the  production  enters  the  intermediate  consumption.  An  interesting  approach  to  identify  customer–supplier relationships is to use input–output tables.   3.2.1   BEA–NACE conversion  The  matrix  of  dependencies  between  activities  is  expressed  in  the  BEA  (Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis)  nomenclature.  This  nomenclature  is adapted  from the NAICS nomenclature of economic  activities  in North  America. Despite this, the correspondence with the latter is not simple because the relationships are of type   ,  , or   . Several NAICS codes can correspond to one and the same BEA code, and the proportions of  breakdowns into these different NAICS codes are not known. It is impossible to use a correspondence table  directly without pre-processing because there are no direct transition tables between the product codes used for  the composition of the IO tables and the different European (NACE) or international (ISIC) nomenclatures.  We need a correspondence table between the BEA code and the different NACE classes. We proceed manually  by evaluating the correspondences between each class arising from the two nomenclatures, using the information  contained in the transition between NACE and NAICS. For each BEA code, we analyze the correspondence with  the NAICS classes, then we determine how many NACE classes are associated with each NAICS class. We treat  the three cases that can occur separately:  code in the breakdown of the NAICS code, then we obtain   iii.    The third case arises when the BEA code is broken down into several NAICS codes, which are broken  down into several NACE codes. Here, the calculation is as follows:       (7)  The only difference here is that the occurrence of industry  is weighted by the number of NAICS codes  present in the BEA code breakdown multiplied by the number of NACE codes present in the NAICS code  breakdown.  We then obtain a BEA to NACE correspondence table, which allows us to modify the IO matrices to obtain a  NACE–NACE association table, which associates  NACE codes in the columns with each NACE code in the  rows, corresponding to potential suppliers. We can then easily list, for a given facility for which the NACE code  is known, the facilities in the territory that could potentially supply it. This table is available online in the project  repository. 3.3 Identify alternative suppliers based on productive proximity  To complete the list of suppliers resulting from the previous process with proposals of closer suppliers, or  simply to compensate for the absence of potential suppliers, we propose a method to identify alternative suppliers.  Alternative suppliers are suppliers that do not currently produce the necessary goods or raw materials but that  could, in the short or medium term, adapt their production tools to produce them.   Let   be the list of recommended suppliers for facility  in territory . Let   be the list of alternative  suppliers for the facility in the territory. The final list of recommended suppliers is defined as follows:  To identify alternative  suppliers,  we  consider  the  similarities  in  know-how  between  the  different  product  classes. We have seen, during different crises, that companies adapt to produce goods that are in short supply,  such as masks, artificial respirators, hydroalcoholic gel, or protective gowns. To measure this level of proximity  between two classes of products, we rely on work related to the study of economic complexity.  From the website of the Atlas of Economic Complexity, we can download a table of product proximities in  HS1992 in four digits.  As we intend to work  on HS2017, we  identify the  correspondence between the two  nomenclatures. 3.3.1   Building weighted correspondence between products and economic activity  We have just studied the notion of a productive relationship between two classes of products; we must now  determine the correspondence with the economic activities to measure the proximities between them according to  the proximity of the products that they produce. From the industry code of a facility, we need to know the typology  of its  production,  that  is,  which  goods  are  produced  and  in  what  proportion. We  can  identify  the  products  associated with an industry code by using correspondence tables. To solve the problem of the weighting of each  product, we use a statistical approach that analyzes the total amount of exports in euros of each class of products  in a territory and deduces the weights. There are several international or national nomenclatures, and we choose  the NACE Rev. 2 nomenclature as the reference nomenclature. Similarly, there are several product nomenclatures,  and we use the Harmonized System (HS) since this nomenclature has been used previously.  Thus, the output associated with activity  in country  is equivalent to:  3.3.2   Multidimensional scaling and the measurement of proximities between activities  We  use  multidimensional  scaling  (MDS)  to  represent  the  products  in  a  vector  space  according  to  their  proximities. In our case, we perform a metric MDS, taking as input a symmetric matrix of dissimilarities between  products. We construct the dissimilarity matrix from the productive proximities.  Let    be the products  and   be the distance between product  and product  in the training set. Our stress majorization cost function  is:   We obtain an m-dimensional vector space  in which each product   is associated with a vector  . From the  weighted correspondence table presented previously, we represent the economic activities in the form of vectors,  the  construction  of  which  is  carried  out  using  the weighted average of the vectors of  the  products  that  are  associated with them. Thus, if products    are associated with economic activity , and if the weights of  each product are represented by variables   , then vector  , representing activity , can be written  as:  We build a proximity table between each NACE code, which is available from the project repository. 4  EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS  The experiments were carried out on the Atlas of Productive Synergies.  We conducted our experiments in  France. The data related to companies are available in  open data from the Sirene database.  For each active  facility, we have information about its activity code,  its postal address, and its French department. We use the  geolocation service to represent the facilities geographically.  When the system fails to find the complete address,  we progressively simplify the address by deleting some elements until we keep only the name of the street and/or  the city and thus obtain the approximate coordinates.  4.1 IO matrices for France  These data are available only at the aggregate level for French production. Indeed, only one input–output table  is made available by Eurostat.  This table is only aggregated into 64 + 1 sectors of activity.   After compiling the French input–output matrix from these data, there are a couple of limitations to its use:  i.  Some  sectors,  particularly  industrial  sectors  such  as  NACE  20  “Manufacture  of  chemicals  and  chemicals products,” are far too aggregated and encompass far too many different activities to allow a  realistic recommendation of these suppliers.  ii.  This database makes it possible to recover information on the construction of the value-added chain  not for the production of a product but for an entire sector of activity. This bias does not allow this  database to be linked to others collected in the framework of the atlas of productive synergies.  Given these two limitations, we decided to use the U.S. table presented earlier. Obviously, the use of this table  requires the assumption that the different value-added chains of products in France are similar to those in the  United  States.  Although  this  assumption  does  not  accurately  reflect  the  economic  reality,  we  assume  this  approximation because there are no significant differences in the composition and rank of importance of products  used as intermediate consumption in the production of a given good between France and the United States.  4.2 Identification of potential suppliers for each French facility  From the IO matrices and geolocation information, we can identify potential suppliers located within a defined  perimeter. For each French facility, we build a list of nearby facilities able to produce the manufactured goods or  raw materials that are part of its intermediate consumption.  In the same way, we compile a second list of alternative suppliers by extending the search to close industry  codes, according to the table constructed in paragraph 3.3.2. For each facility, we therefore have two lists of  potential suppliers. We obtain a network representing the potential productive synergies between French facilities.  5  CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES  In this study, we exploited open data to build a network of potential suppliers associated with a territory. Our  main contribution lies in the joint use of input–output matrices and know-how proximity data. We defined a new  similarity  matrix  between  two  industry  codes  based  on  the  proximity  of  their  respective  vectors  in  a  multidimensional space.  Our  work  offers  a  solution  to  the  search  for  local  suppliers  for  firms  and  thus  promotes  distributed  manufacturing and the reconstruction of sustainable productive systems. In addition, it opens up new perspectives  in the definition of a territorial industrial resilience indicator. The main approaches based on network analysis are  focused on the actual production (Craighead et al., 2007; Kharrazi et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2015; Zio & Piccinelli,  2010). However, alternative production is activated in the event of a destabilizing shock, as happened during the  last health crisis. The underlying idea is that, in terms of resilience, it may not be necessary to produce certain  goods if local suppliers are able to modify their production line quickly to produce them. Suppliers adapt their  production to compensate for shortages of certain products, and the integration of this new dimension is interesting  to investigate. 