Department of Physics, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK Department of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Radboud University, P.O. Box 9010, 6500 GL, The Netherlands Astrophysical transients are central to our understanding of stellar populations due to their dependence on the evolutionary history of the progenitor stars. Transient studies, therefore, probe distinct evolutionary and environmental parameters, although subject to model uncertainties. Commonly observed events are electromagnetic transients, which include supernovae (SNe), their many SNe subtypes, Long Gamma-Ray Bursts (LGRB), and Pair-Instability SNe (PISNe), while the gravitational wave (GW) transients comprise black hole-neutron star (BHNS), binary black hole (BBH), and binary neutron star (BNS) mergers, with the latter also producing an electromagnetic signal, know as a short gamma-ray burst (Abbott et al. 2017). Predicting cosmic transient rates is an essential test for population synthesis codes and provides insight into the underlying stellar population producing these short-lived astrophysical events. To perform these predictions, environment and stellar evolution prescriptions are required. The inﬂuence of the former on transient rates has started to be considered in detail in the last few years and pri- © 2020 The Authors marily focuses on GW transients (Kruckow et al. 2018; Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018; Santoliquido et al. 2020a; Tang et al. 2020; du Buisson et al. 2020; Chruslinska & Nelemans 2019; Chruslinska et al. 2019; Belczynski et al. 2020). It describes the amount of stellar material formed (cosmic star formation rate density; CSFRD) and metallicity evolution over the history of the Universe. Traditionally, the CSFRD is an empirical ﬁt to volume-averaged UV and IR observations (Behroozi et al. 2013; Madau & Dickinson 2014; Madau & Fragos 2017) averaging out the eﬀects of cosmic variance due to large scale structures. It is well measured up to a redshift of 8, with limited observations going up to 𝑧 = 10. At lower redshifts further constraints on the empirical cosmic star formation history (SFH) can be obtained, such as using radio (Karim et al. 2011; Matthews et al. 2021), 24 micron (Rodighiero et al. 2010) or, most commonly, H𝛼 (Gilbank et al. 2010) observations, which ﬁnd similar results to UV and IR estimates. The second component of the environment prescriptions (the metallicity) consists of an average cosmic metallicity evolution, a mass function, and mass-metallicity correlations, which are combined to give a fractional mass density per metallicity over redshift, as described in Langer & Norman (2006). Each component is empirically ﬁtted using diﬀerent techniques from emission-line studies to deep sky surveys. Moreover, it is widely used in population synthesis studies of GW transients, and modiﬁed and tested against GW transient rates by Neĳssel et al. (2019). The combination of CSFRD and metallicity evolution provides a metallicity-speciﬁc cosmic SFH that conforms to observations, but it misses the details of at the scale of individual galaxies and is subject to observational biases and sparse data. This additional level of detail can be provided by cosmological simulations, which produce star formation histories and metallicity evolution on a per galaxy basis, though subject to the assumed input physics and numerical limits. As a result, cosmological simulations have been extensively used to look at the relations between host galaxies and GW transients (Artale et al. 2019, 2020; Mapelli et al. 2017; Mapelli & Giacobbo 2018; Mapelli et al. 2019; Toﬀano et al. 2019). And with improvements to the input physics and output resolution in recent years, cosmological simulations reproduce many observational relations, such as the CSFRD and galaxy colour bimodality at low redshift (Nelson et al. 2018). The stellar prescription for predicting cosmic transients is encompassed in the physics of a population synthesis code and needs to cover a broad mass range and binary conﬁgurations due to the variety in transient progenitors. The inﬂuence of the implemented evolutionary physics on the compact object merger rate has been explored using rapid population synthesis codes (e.g. Dominik et al. 2013; Mapelli et al. 2017; Mapelli & Giacobbo 2018; Mapelli et al. 2019; Santoliquido et al. 2020a; Artale et al. 2020; Broekgaarden et al. 2021). Such codes allow for the exploration of a vast evolutionary parameter space using a variety of models and analytical ﬁts, but therefore is limited in the inclusion of computationally intensive detailed stellar structures, which can alter the outcome of binary interactions (Gallegos-Garcia et al. 2021). We use the detailed models from Binary Population And Spectral Synthesis (BPASS) (Eldridge et al. 2017; Stanway & Eldridge 2018) to predict EM and GW transient rates from a single population. Similar to Eldridge et al. (2019), we combine these rates with a star formation history to extract the cosmic event rate density. But instead of using an empirical CSFRD and metallicity description, we extract detailed star formation histories (SFHs) and metallicity evolution from the EAGLE (Schaye et al. 2015; Crain et al. 2015), IllustrisTNG (Springel et al. 2018; Nelson et al. 2018; Pillepich et al. 2018a; Naiman et al. 2018; Marinacci et al. 2018), and MilliMillennium (Springel et al. 2005) simulations. By predicting all transients from these diﬀerent synthetic stellar populations, we put the most robust and self-consistent constraints to date on the population synthesis physics and the star formation environment. Moreover, it removes possible degeneracies that can originate when looking at a single transient rate. Section 2 discusses the population synthesis of BPASS and EM and GW transients it predicts. The empirical and cosmological simulation star formation histories discussed in section 3 and are combined in section 4 with the BPASS predictions to extract cosmic transient rates. We discuss the volume-averaged transient rates and compare them against observations in section 5. Section 6 puts the work in the context of other results, combines the rates, and section 7 concludes with a brief summary of our results. The BPASS comprises of a grid of 1D theoretical stellar models with single and binary star evolution, which includes stellar winds, mass transfer through Roche Lobe overﬂow, common envelope evolution, rejuvenation, and chemically homogeneous evolution. The BPASS v2.2.1 models (Eldridge et al. 2017; Stanway & Eldridge 2018), used in this paper, are weighted using a Kroupa (2001) initial mass function extended to 300 Mand initial binary parameters from empirical distributions (Moe & Di Stefano 2017), creating a population with known mass and age. The grid of stellar models contains 13 metallicities ranging from 𝑍 = 10to 0.04 with 𝑍 = 0.020 considered Solar metallicity. A vital beneﬁt of the detailed stellar models is the access to the star’s structure at the end of its life, which provides a systematic method to predict the subsequent transient. An extensive deﬁnition of the transient deﬁnitions in BPASS can be found in Eldridge et al. (2013, 2017), here we provide a short overview of the criteria. Massive stars (M & 8 M) end their life in an explosion caused by the collapse of the stellar core, appropriately named a CoreCollapse Supernova (CCSN) (e.g. Heger et al. 2003; Smartt et al. 2009). BPASS classiﬁes CCSN progenitors as stars that have a carbon-oxygen core above 1.38 M, and have a ﬁnal stellar mass above 1.5 M. These models have undergone carbon burning and generate a oxygen-neon core capable of collapsing resulting in a supernova (Tout 2011). From an observational point of view, CCSNe are divided into subtypes based on their spectra; Type II SNe are hydrogen-rich, while Types Ib and Ic lack hydrogen completely but exhibit either the presence or absence, respectively, of helium (Filippenko 1997). Within BPASS, the elemental abundances in the ejecta mass are a proxy to determine the subtype of the CCSN (Eldridge et al. 2011, 2013, 2017). The parameters were chosen for each CCSN subtype to match the observed local relative rates within ∼20 Mpc (Eldridge et al. 2013) and the Ib to Ic relative rate in Shivvers et al. (2017). Multiple formation pathways contribute to each of the progenitors; for example, an envelope can be removed by strong stellar winds (Heger et al. 2003; Woosley et al. 2002), stable mass transfer with a binary companion, or the explosion of a companion (Paczyński 1971; Podsiadlowski 1992; De Donder & Vanbeveren 1998; Vanbeveren et al. 1998; Smith et al. 2011). The CCSNe progenitors that have lost most or all of their hydrogen envelope are also known as stripped-envelope SNe (SESNe) and are likely to originate from binary systems (Yoon et al. 2010; Yoon 2015). During some SESNe, a relativistic jet is launched, and its interaction with the stellar envelope or the surrounding medium can excite highenergy emission, detectable as a long Gamma-Ray Burst (LGRB) (e.g. Heger et al. 2003; Langer 2012). BPASS only considers LGRB formation through chemically homogeneous evolution through fast rotation and mixing caused by low metallicity mass transfer. If the star’s evolution leads to a CCSN with a remnant mass greater than 3 M, it is classiﬁed as an LGRB in BPASS. Tidal and magnetarinduced GRBs are added through post-processing by models from Chrimes et al. (2020). At the end of their main-sequence evolution, extremely massive stars (M & 100−130 M) have a low density, high-temperature helium core. This combination gives rise to electron-positron pair production and removes the radiative pressure that keeps the star from collapsing. The subsequent pair-instability SN (PISN) completely disrupts the star, and no remnant is left behind (Fowler & Hoyle 1964; Rakavy & Shaviv 1967; Heger & Woosley 2002). While the exact mass range is uncertain (Farmer et al. 2019; Woosley & Heger 2021, and references therein), BPASS deﬁnes a PISN progenitor as a star with a helium core mass between 64 and 133 M. Observationally no conﬁdent detection has been made, but several Super-Luminous Type I SNe have been identiﬁed as possible candidates (Woosley et al. 2007; Cooke et al. 2012; Gal-Yam et al. 2009; Terreran et al. 2017; Gomez et al. 2019). Like some SESNe, Type Ia SNe also lack hydrogen in their spectra but are not the result of a core-collapse. Instead, they originate from binary progenitors that involve an electron-degenerate white dwarf. This star gains mass from a main-sequence companion (single-degenerate channel) or merges with another white dwarf through the emission of gravitational waves (double-degenerate channel). If, as a result of the added mass, the white dwarf approaches or exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit of 1.4M, a thermonuclear explosion occurs (e.g. Howell 2011; Maoz et al. 2014). Besides being the main driving force behind the Type Ia double-degenerate formation pathway, the loss of orbital energy through gravitational wave emission also drives the decrease in orbital separation and merger of other double compact object systems, such as binary neutron star (BNS), black hole-neutron star (BHNS), and binary black hole (BBH) systems. Seconds before the merger, an increase in gravitational wave frequency and amplitude allows for measurement of this chirp event using the LIGO/VIRGO detector network (Abbott et al. 2016). If a BPASS binary system is still bound after both stars have undergone a supernova explosion and two compact objects have been created, the time until the merger is calculated using the gravitational wave radiation orbital energy loss prescription from Peters (1964). The carbon-oxygen core mass at the time of the SN determines the formation of a BH or NS. For the prediction of the cosmic transient rates, we require the number of transients and the time from stellar birth to the transient for each of the BPASS stellar populations, which are 13 delay time distributions (DTDs), each at a diﬀerent metallicity of which two are shown in Figure 1 to show their dependence on metallicity. For example, the distribution of Type Ia SNe and compact object mergers diﬀers between 𝑍 = 0.020 and 𝑍 = 0.001, while the PISNe and LGRBs are constraint to low metallicity populations (Heger et al. 2003, and references therein). But, as Figure 1 shows, the total CCSN distribution is mostly unaﬀected by metallicity. It is, however, inﬂuenced by the presence of binaries, which increase the delay time of CCSNe to 250 Myr compared to the tens of Myr for single star evolution (Zapartas et al. 2017). These delay time distributions will be combined with the SFH to predict the transient rates. The CSFRD is ﬁtted from empirically calibrated SFR indicators using UV and IR observations, which are sensitive to the assumed extinction from dust in distant galaxies (Wilkins et al. 2016, 2018). Early ﬁts include a power-law time-dependence (e.g. Behroozi et al. 2013), but more recent ﬁts typically use a parameterisation for redshift evolution introduced by Madau & Dickinson (2014): 𝜓(𝑧) = 0.001(1 + 𝑧)1 + [(1 + 𝑧)/2.9]MyrMpc(1) We transform Equation 15 from Madau & Dickinson (2014) from a Salpeter (Salpeter 1955) to a Kroupa IMF by multiplying by 0.66, and this function is shown in Figure 2 as the pink dashed line. It peaks at 𝑧 = 2 while declining in the high and low redshift direction, with the current SFR being similar to 𝑧 ≈ 6. The CSFRD from Madau & Dickinson (2014) is widely used, as such it is our basis for comparison against simulations. MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) We combine the CSFRD with cosmic metallicity distribution and evolution from Langer & Norman (2006) as used in Eldridge et al. (2019) and Tang et al. (2020): where Γ andˆΓ are the complete and incomplete gamma functions, respectively, and 𝑍 is the volume-averaged metallicity of newly formed stars at redshift 𝑧. We use the 2018 Planck results as our cosmology throughout this paper (ℎ = 0.6766, Ω= 0.3111, and Ω= 0.6889). To be able to compare all the ﬁnal rates, all SFH have to be brought to the this cosmology. The empirical SFH extracted from UV observations has an ℎ dependence coming from an 1/ℎfor the SFR and a 1/ℎ from the comoving volume. Since the Madau & Dickinson (2014) CSFRD is given in MyrMpc, we transform this by ﬁrst reintroducing the ℎ dependence followed by applying our cosmology. The SFHs from the cosmological simulations and cosmic event rate observations, on the other hand, have an ℎdependence coming from the comoving volume, but similar to the empirical CSFRD we transform them to our cosmology. Observationally derived relations have the advantage of being datadriven but are subject to uncertainties in observational completeness and model-dependence in the calibrations required to recover the SFR or metallicity from the data. By contrast, cosmic volume hydrodynamic simulations represent a Universe in which such eﬀects are controlled, and the properties of stars are known precisely. However, they require a tremendous amount of computational power and are subject to their own uncertainties in the assumed physical interactions or sub-grid prescriptions. These simulations start with dark matter and baryonic particles distributed through a simulation box according to initial conditions based on cosmic microwave background observations. The boxes are evolved up to the current time using simulated large-scale interactions, semi-analytical models for small-scale inﬂuences and in some cases also hydrodynamical gas modelling. The assumed strength of interactions and subgrid physics are tuned to match observations or according to theoretical prescriptions. To compare the impact of the SFH on transient rates, we compare the MilliMillennium, EAGLE, and IllustrisTNG simulations to cover diﬀerent release years, sizes, and physical models. The MilliMillennium Simulation is a subset of the N-body dark matter Millennium Simulation with ΛCDM cosmology with parameters ℎ = 0.73, Ω= 0.25, and Ω= 0.75 (Springel et al. 2005). Released in 2005, it contains 270particles in a 62.5 ℎMpc box, with each particle representing 8.6 × 10ℎMdark matter with a spacial resolution of 5 ℎkpc. We will refer to the MilliMillennium as Millennium in this paper. As demonstrated by Stanway et al. (2018), this box is suﬃciently large to recover the volume-averaged properties of the bulk galaxy population, although the full simulation would be required to recover rare systems such as extremely massive large scale structures. Starting at 𝑧 = 127, 64 selected time steps, known as snapshots, are stored with their gravitationally bound substructure, subhaloes. These are identiﬁed by the SUBFIND algorithm Springel et al. (2001) and used to build a merger Figure 2. The cosmic star formation rate density over redshift (left) and lookback time (right) for the empirical prescription from Madau & Dickinson (pink dashed), and rates extracted from the Millennium (green), EAGLE (purple), and IllustrisTNG (orange) simulations. tree of subhaloes, which is the basic input for the semi-analytical models of galaxy formation (De Lucia & Blaizot 2007). When the gas surface density is higher than a critical value, star formation in a disk takes place and follows the parameterisation by Croton et al. (2006); bulge star formation, however, only occurs during the merger of subhaloes and follows the Somerville et al. (2001) collisional starburst model, which is only able to reproduce the observed gas fraction as a function of galaxy luminosity. Evolution and Assembly of GaLaxies and their Environments (EAGLE) (Schaye et al. 2015; Crain et al. 2015) is a hybrid N-body and hydrodynamical simulation. It contains dark matter particles with a mass of 9.70× 10M, and baryonic gas particles of 1.81× 10M in a 100 Mpcbox for the ﬁducial model (L0100N1504). The EAGLE simulation has a Ω= 0.307, Ω= 0.693, and ℎ = 0.6777 cosmology and does not provide their output with explicit dependence on the Hubble parameter. Therefore, we use the simulations cosmology to reintroduce the ℎdependence and then apply our cosmology to allow for comparison. While only 29 snapshots were recorded between 𝑧 = 127 and 𝑧 = 0, 1504particles were used to study galaxy formation. The stellar formation is resolved using sub-grid physics and depends on the pressure in dense gas, and is tuned to reproduce the observed Kennicutt-Schmidt relation (Schmidt 1959). The simulation includes prescriptions for black hole and supernova feedback mechanisms that return baryons to the intergalactic medium and enrich the environment. A full description can be found in Wiersma et al. (2009). The feedback mechanisms and star formation rate are calibrated to reproduce the galaxy luminosity function at 𝑧 = 0.1, BH-stellar mass relation, and galaxy size (Crain et al. 2015). A merger tree is constructed using the same SUBFIND algorithm as the Millennium simulation, but with slight adjustments and inclusion of baryonic matter in substructure identiﬁcation (Dolag et al. 2009). Similar to EAGLE, The Next Generation Illustris simulation (IllustrisTNG) is a hybrid simulation that contains dark matter and baryonic matter. These have particle masses 7.5 × 10Mand 1.4 × 10M, respectively, in the TNG100-1 simulation (Springel et al. 2018; Nelson et al. 2018; Pillepich et al. 2018a; Naiman et al. 2018; Marinacci et al. 2018), which we shall refer to as the TNG simulation in this paper. 1820dark matter and 1820baryonic particles are included in the simulation volume of 110.7cMpc and are evolved from 𝑧 = 127 to present day in a ℎ = 0.6774, Ω= 0.30897, and Ω= 0.6911 ΛCDM Universe from Ade et al. (2015). Again, we scale to our own cosmology. Like the other two simulations, the IllustrisTNG is a hydrodynamic simulation but also includes magnetic ﬁelds and new feedback prescriptions. These and the galaxy formation models are fully described in Weinberger et al. (2017) and Pillepich et al. (2018b) and aim to agree with observational constraints, such as the cosmic star formation rate density and the stellar mass content of galaxies at 𝑧 = 0. Again, the SUBFIND algorithm ﬁnds subhaloes (galaxies), but the IllustrisTNG introduces a "SubhaloFlag" to identify gravitationally-bound clusters that are numerical artefacts and not of cosmological origin (Nelson et al. 2019). We remove non-cosmological subhaloes from our sample. By tracing the baryonic content of each galaxy, the SUBLINK algorithm generates merger trees (Rodriguez-Gomez et al. 2015). For the cosmological simulations, we extract the merger trees of each non-zero stellar-mass galaxy at 𝑧 = 0 using the public APIs [EAGLE (McAlpine et al. 2016), TNG; (Nelson et al. 2018), Millennium (Lemson & Consortium 2006)]. Each galaxy has its own individual metallicity and SFR evolution inﬂuenced by stellar evolution and galaxy interactions, allowing for a broader range of galaxy metallicities than the empirical CSFRD. The SFR distribution over metallicity and redshift in Figure 3 shows that the cosmological simulations have a wider metallicity spread and faster enrichment of the Universe than the empirical parameterisation. The latter is especially true for the Millennium simulation, which achieves a high mean metallicity at 𝑧 = 10 and stays nearly ﬂat throughout cosmic history. This is similar to the mean metallicity evolution of the TNG MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) Table 1. The cosmic event rate predictions, log( R), at 𝑧 = 0 in a events per year per Gpcfor the diﬀerent star formation histories. CCSN contain the Type II, IIP, Ib, and Ic supernovae types. The star formation rate at 𝑧 = 0 and 𝑧 = 1 are shown for comparison against the rates. simulation, which remains mostly ﬂat with only a fast increase between log(1 + 𝑧) = 0.8 and log(1 + 𝑧) = 1.0. The EAGLE and empirical distributions, on the other hand, have a gradual increase in their mean metallicity towards current time. In the case of the EAGLE, we even see evidence for a bimodal distribution in the metallicity evolution with a constant high metallicity population at 𝑍 = 0.015 from log(1 + 𝑧) = 0.8 to current time, and a second lower metallicity population that is present from the start of star formation and slowly increases in metallicity over redshift. This complex behaviour cannot be reproduced in the analytical models typically used. This, for example, allows for low metallicity events to still occur when high metallicity events are more prevalent. Using the metallicity and star formation at each snapshot for each galaxy and the dimensions of the simulation, we construct a volume-averaged CSFRD, as shown in Figure 2. At redshifts below 𝑧 = 2, the shapes of the CSFRDs are similar but diﬀer in normalisation with the Millennium CSFRD and semi-analytical prescription having the highest SFRs at 𝑧 = 0 followed closely by the TNG and EAGLE CSFRD. The 𝑧 = 0 and 𝑧 = 2 SFR rates are shown in Table 1. Above 𝑧 = 2, the shape of the Millennium CSFRD and the long tail of the empirical CSFRD stand out. It is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than the other CSFRD by peaking later with a broader spread at 𝑧 = 3.31. The empirical CSFRD, on the other hand peaks sharply at 𝑧 = 1.87 with the tail continuing into high redshift, while the rates of the cosmological simulations at these early times, when we expect low metallicity to dominate, are low to non-existent. Based on the mean stellar metallicity reported by the simulation, individual galaxies are binned into one of the 13 BPASS metallicities, resulting in metallicity-speciﬁc SFR over redshift, as shown in Figure 4. The empirical CSFRD from (Madau & Dickinson 2014) is split into the same metallicity bins using the prescription from Langer & Norman (2006), as described in Section 3.1. The metallicity distributions in Figure 4 indicate an early start in high metallicity star formation in the cosmological simulations. At 𝑧 ∼ 6 solar metallicity star formation is ongoing, while the empiri- Figure 3. The star formation rate density distribution over metallicity and over log solid line with the 1𝜎 spread shown by the solid grey lines. The dashed red line indicates the SFR weighted mean metallicity. The empirical prescription has a slow increase over redshift, while the Millennium simulation has the opposite evolution with a near ﬂat high median metallicity over redshift. The EAGLE and TNG start at low metallicity at high redshift and have a fast increasing metallicity as the Universe evolves to current day. cal prescription only starts formation at this metallicity at 𝑧 = 4. The faster enrichment signiﬁcantly impacts the rate of speciﬁc transients due to their sensitivity to metallicity, see Section 2. Furthermore, a late start in star formation in the cosmological CSFRD reduces the amount of low-metallicity star formation at high redshift. To estimate transient rates, the metallicity speciﬁc SFHs have to be combined with the associated transient DTDs from section 2. This is achieved by splitting the ﬁnal lookback time into equalsized bins in linear space. For each bin ( 𝑗) we calculate the rate (1 + 𝑧). The median SFR weighted metallicity is indicated with the red (𝑅) as described in equation 3, where 𝑡are the bin edges. We integrate the SFH using linear interpolation to account for changes between snapshots. The integrated DTD and SFH are multiplied, 10Millennium0.040 100.030 100.020 10TNG0.014 Figure 4. The cosmic star formation rate densities for our empirical prescription, and the Millennium, EAGLE and TNG simulations split into the 13 BPASS metallicity bins indicated by the colour bar. The total star formation rate density is indicated by the black solid line. summed over each time bin, and the result is divided by the bin width, resulting in the number of events per year per Gpc. The described method has been made available as a module in hoki, which is a python framework and interface for BPASS models (Stevance et al. 2020). The csp module contains several built-in stellar formation histories and allows the user to input their own binned or parameterised SFH to generate complex stellar populations. Moreover, it calculates BPASS transient rates originating from this population at a speciﬁc lookback time or over the complete history of the Universe. The formation of a white dwarf and subsequent accretion or merger leading to a thermonuclear explosion takes 10to 10years depending on metallicity and stellar evolution, due to the inherent binary nature of this event. With the long time between stellar birth MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) Figure 5. Type Ia SN rate predicted from the four stellar formation histories, compared with observations drawn from a collection of surveys described in Table A1. Table 2. The redshift (𝑧) of the peak in star formation history, Type Ia, CCSN, PISN, and BBH rates. and SN, the Type Ia rate probes older star formation (Ruiter et al. 2009; Mennekens et al. 2010; Ruiter et al. 2011; Maoz & Mannucci 2012; Eldridge et al. 2019), which we conﬁrm by comparing the peaks of star formation against the peaks of the Type Ia rate in Table 2. The peak Type Ia SN rate occurs Δ(𝑧) ≈ 1 − 2 later than the peak in star formation with the exact delay depending on the simulation and its metallicity evolution. The rates over redshift are shown in Figure 5 with a collection of observations for comparison. The Millennium and empirical predictions lie around these observations, while the EAGLE and TNG simulations underpredict the rates and only align with a few observed rates at 𝑧 < 0.5. The accurate empirical prediction is in contrast to the overestimation in Eldridge et al. (2019) due to reweighing of the CSFRD from a Salpeter to a Kroupa IMF. The model predictions, however, diﬀer less than a factor 2. To assess the goodness of the predictions, we calculate the reduced 𝜒and see in Table 3 that the EAGLE and TNG has reduced 𝑐ℎ𝑖closest to 1. However, we note that due to the large uncertainties of the observations, all reduced 𝑐ℎ𝑖of the Type Ia predictions are below 1, indicating that the choice between these SFH and metallicity evolution are minimally important in predicting the Type Ia rate given current observations. Table 3. The reduced 𝜒value from each model using the given data, where N is the number of observed cosmic event rates for the speciﬁc event type. All weights each observed rate equally. ★ includes the tidal LGRB contribution from Chrimes et al. (2020) and is, therefore, left out of the All. : the calculated rate from Zhao et al. (2020) is left out due to the absence of an uncertainty on the observation. Figure 6. Predicted core-collapse supernova rates with a compilation of observational estimates in grey for comparison (see Table A2). CCSNe occur in young stellar populations, because the CCSN progenitors are massive stars that burn through their nuclear fuel quickly and, thus, have short delay times (10- 10years). This creates a tight relationship between the SFR and cosmic CCSN rate, as the alignment of the peaks between the CCSN rate and SFH peaks in Table 2 shows. Not only do the peaks align, the CCSN predictions over redshift also closely track the shape of the associated CSFRD, and are shown in Figure 6 with observations. Below 𝑧 = 0.5 they follow observations closely till around 𝑧 = 0.9 after which the observations are split in two clusters. The ﬁrst has data points around 𝑧 = 1 and 𝑧 = 1.5 with high CCSN rates originating from a collection of surveys (Melinder et al. 2012; Dahlen et al. 2012; Graur et al. 2011). At these redshifts, the empirical CCSN rate prediction has the best ﬁtting rates. The cosmological CCSN rate predictions align better with the second cluster of data points, which are located between 𝑧 ∼ 1 − 2.5, have lower rates, and originate from a single survey by Strolger et al. (2015). Diﬀerent approaches in correcting for missed SNe due to high extinction could result in this grouping. Because the CCSN rate follows star formation closely, they often Figure 7. The core-collapse supernova events split up by possible subtypes with a single observed stripped-envelope supernova rate by Frohmaier et al. (2021), and two Type II observations (See Table A4). happen in very dusty star-forming regions and can be obscured, especially at high redshifts. Hence the fraction of missed SNe has to be accounted for. The higher estimates use a prescription from Mattila et al. (2012), which can increase the CCSNe rate signiﬁcantly. Local overdensities of star formation in the survey ﬁelds might also cause these observations to be overestimated (Dahlen et al. 2012). Strolger et al. (2015), on the other hand, use their own method based on the Calzetti et al. (2000) extinction law, but these high redshift observations are challenging and only survey a small area compared to other supernova surveys leaving them more vulnerable to cosmic variance and low number counts. Finally, this grouping and the large standard deviation of the ﬁrst cluster results in a 1.01 reduced 𝜒for the Millennium simulation and slightly worse values for the empirical, EAGLE and TNG predictions as shown in Table 3. Although the same explosion mechanism causes CCSNe, the subtypes come from progenitors with diﬀerent mass ranges and mass loss histories, as described in Section 1. By looking at the rate of the subtypes and their fraction to the total CCSN rate, we extract more information about the progenitors. However, the limited number of SESN events restricts the calculation of an observed rate. Frohmaier et al. (2021) is one of the few studies to calculate the total combined rate for Type IIb, Ib, and Ic events. Since BPASS does not distinguish between Type II subtypes except for Type IIP events, we use the fraction from Eldridge et al. (2013) of 0.6541 to estimate the Type IIb rate from the non-IIP Type II events. This fraction is not well constrained and diﬀers for other surveys (e.g. Smith et al. 2011; Li et al. 2011a). Figure 7 shows that the predicted rates lie above the Frohmaier et al. (2021) observed rate estimate of 2.18 × 10yrGpcin our cosmology at h𝑧i = 0.028. Rates calculated using the EAGLE model approaches this rate with 2.40×10yrGpc, but the other SFHs overpredict the observed Figure 8. The relative fraction of all supernovae that originate from massive stars. LGRB, PISN, and Type II rates (purple, red, orange) decrease as the Universe enriches, while the Type Ib/c (brown and pink) rates increase. The fraction of massive stars ending their life in a Type IIP supernova (blue) is near constant over redshift. rate with the Millennium Simulation deviating the most with a rate of 3.65 × 10yrGpc. The Type II rate predictions align with observed rates from Li et al. (2011b) and Cappellaro et al. (2015), although the empirical and Millennium SFHs result in an overestimation of this subtype. For the other CCSN subtypes, Type Ib and Type Ic, no observational cosmic rates are available for comparison. Instead, we note that the Type Ib and Ic rates have similar shapes due to similar progenitors and sensitivity to the metallicity evolution. The absolute rate of Type Ib events, however, is slightly higher than Type Ic due to the diﬃculty of stripping the helium envelope required for a Type Ic SN. Distinguishing between the individual predictions for either of these SN types is impossible at low redshift due to the minimal diﬀerence in the rates, which could be attributed to a small diﬀerence in metallicity between the predictions. The metallicity distributions in Figure 3 shows that the EAGLE, TNG and empirical CSFRDs have similar metallicities at these low redshifts, while the Millennium simulation has a slightly lower mean metallicity. However, above a metallicity of half solar, the Ib/c rates in the DTD are near constant, which, together with the similar CSFRD, results in similar rates for the cosmic Type Ib/c predictions. At higher redshifts, the metallicity and CSFRDs become more distinct, which separates the cosmic Type Ib/c rates, as can be seen in Figure 2 and 7. The Type II SN rates are an order of magnitude higher than the Type Ib and Ic rates and dominate the CCSN predictions, because the progenitor systems do not need to undergo envelope stripping and can be of single or binary star nature, resulting in the predicted rates more closely following the CSFRD. While the cosmic rates of CCSN subtypes are hard to come by, the fractions of Ib, Ic, and IIb with respect to the total number CCSNe are available from several surveys (Li et al. 2011a; Smith et al. 2011; Shivvers et al. 2017; Perley et al. 2020). Therefore, we show our predictions and the fractions from the volume-limited survey up to 60 Mpc from Shivvers et al. (2017) in Table 4. Our Type II predictions are signiﬁcantly lower than the observed fraction. The magnitude-limited survey from Perley et al. (2020), however, predicts a lower Type II fraction of 0.722, which is closer to our predictions, although still signiﬁcantly higher than the 0.64 and 0.67 fractions for the EAGLE and TNG predicted fractions. A slightly higher fraction of 0.766 is found by the 100 Mpc volume-limited MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) Table 4. Fraction of CCSN subtypes at 𝑧 = 0 for predicted rates. Shivvers et al. (2017) is volume-limited to 60Mpc. survey by Smith et al. (2020). Instead of the Type II events, there are fractionally more Type Ib/c events in our predictions of which the bulk are Type Ib events. This discrepancy could indicate too swift an enrichment, a too strong stellar wind prescription, a diﬀerent mass transfer eﬃciency, or a combination of the above. Since the EAGLE and TNG simulations enrich faster than the Millennium simulation and empirical description, this is the likely origin. Looking at the evolution of the relative fractions of SNe that originate from massive stars in Figure 8 makes it clear that the Type IIP remains constant over redshift, because these typically come from single stars and wide binaries. In comparison, the other type II SN fraction decreases with decreasing redshift, being replaced by Type Ib/c. The reason for this is that while binary interactions remove much of the envelope, stellar winds play a signiﬁcant role in the further evolution. Thus, more metal-rich stellar populations are dominated by SNe that have experienced more mass loss. The scale of this change depends on the metallicity distribution as shown in Figure 3, where the mean metallicity evolution of the Millennium simulation is near ﬂat, as is the evolution of the Type Ib/c rate in Figure 8. The other SFHs, on the other hand, have a clear metallicity evolution, which shows in the relative fraction change indicating that the Type Ib/c fractions over redshift are good tracers for the metallicity evolution. LGRB afterglows have been observed as coincident with broadlined Type Ic (Ic-BL) and represent a subset of energetic Ic events, where a relativistic jet is launched from the surface of a nascent black hole or magnetar formed during core-collapse. The furthest Figure 9. The predicted LGRB rates from the standard BPASS output (solid) with additional post-processed LGRB pathways added from Chrimes et al. (2020) (dashed) are shown for all four environment prescriptions. The opening angle and luminosity corrected SHOALS rates are shown for comparison (grey triangles) (Perley et al. 2016). GRB has been measured at 𝑧 = 9.4 (Cucchiara et al. 2011), but it is diﬃcult to derive a volumetric rate for such sources because their emission is highly relativistic beamed. As a result, their observability depends on the event’s geometry, speciﬁcally the jet opening angle. We use the observed GRB rate over redshift from the SHOALS sample (Perley et al. 2016) that we correct for the event geometry and missed low-luminosity events. To achieve this, we adopt the method from Chrimes et al. (2020), and integrate over the GRB luminosity function of Pescalli et al. (2016) from a isotropic equivalent energy of E= 10erg to E= 10erg, while correcting for an opening angle of 𝜃 = 9.9°. The grey triangle in Figure 9 shows the corrected SHOALS rate. The predicted LGRB rates from BPASS, shown as solid lines in Figure 9, only contain events formed through chemically homogeneous evolution at low metallicities (Eldridge et al. 2017), which is lower than observed, as expected. Additional tidal formation pathways have been added post-process by Chrimes et al. (2020, dashed line in Figure 9). These pathways mostly contribute at low redshifts and boost the predicted rate to a similar order of magnitude as the observations. However, the shape of the predicted rates no longer follows the same gradient as the observations and peaks at lower redshift. Due to the diﬃculty in constraining the observed rate and because the agreement is, of course, in part a consequence of the tuning of the LGRB opening angle parameters with a similar empirical CSFRD prescription as adopted here (Chrimes et al. 2020), it is not possible to distinguish between the star formation histories as of yet. Although the LGRB are related to the Type Ic, their relative fractions evolve in opposite fashion in Figure 8. While the Type Ic increase over redshift, the LGRB rate drops signiﬁcantly, because angular momentum required for the LGRB is removed by the stronger stellar winds in a more enriched Universe (Woosley et al. Figure 10. Predicted Pair-Instability Supernova rates with observational rates from Super-Luminous Supernova Type-I measurements (see appendix Table A3. 2002; Vink et al. 2001) and are therefore sensitive to low metallicity star formation. This relation between the two event rates can help us probe the metallicity distribution of a stellar population, especially since the chemically homogeneous LGRB event have a short delay allowing us to probe the change in low metallicity star formation. Very massive stars (& 100 M) reach the end of their life in only a few million years. The fast fusion leads to a low internal core density, while the temperature in the helium core reaches electron-positron production levels, causing the radiative pressure to drop due to the removal of photons. Without a force to counteract gravity, the star collapses in a PISN and completely disrupts the star, leaving no remnant behind (Fowler & Hoyle 1964; Rakavy & Shaviv 1967; Heger & Woosley 2002). The short lifetime, due to the high hydrogen burning rate, and the high metallicity sensitivity makes this event a perfect candidate for SFH probes (Yusof et al. 2010, 2013; Dessart et al. 2012; Fryer et al. 2001; Eldridge et al. 2019). Currently, no smoking-gun evidence of a PISN has been observed, although a few hydrogen-poor super-luminous supernovae (SLSN-I) have been identiﬁed as possible candidates (Woosley et al. 2007; Cooke et al. 2012; Gal-Yam et al. 2009; Terreran et al. 2017; Gomez et al. 2019). Their energy requirements are too high to be consistent with the classical core collapse mechanism, but this remains unproven (Kozyreva & Blinnikov 2015) and alternative explanations, such as magnetars (Howell 2017; Kasen & Bildsten 2010; Woosley 2010; Inserra et al. 2013), rotational PISN (Renzo & Zapartas 2020), and late leakage from pulsar wind nebula (Dessart et al. 2012), are also likely. Nonetheless, in Figure 10 we have used the observed rate of SLSN-I that are possible PISN for comparison. The event rates from the simulations show the non-smooth nature of the low metallicity star formation rate at low redshift, speciﬁcally the EAGLE simulation. Its event rate has a signiﬁcant drop at 𝑧 = 0.1 which is caused by a drop in the low metallicity star Figure 11. Binary BH merger rate predictions with observations from Abbott et al. (2021a) with the lowest 5% to highest 95% credible interval of their considered population models at 𝑧 = 0 and 𝑧 = 0.2 for the non-evolving and evolving merger rates, respectively. The 𝑧 = 0 rates are shaded and extended out to 𝑧 = 0.15 for clarity. formation. Since they have limited star formation at low redshift and PISN mostly occur in low metallicity environments, only the predicted event rate from the empirical CSFRD aligns with the observations. The uncertainty in the formation pathway of SLSN-I makes it not possible to state if SLSN-I are a good indicator for the PISN rate, except that their observed rate is within an order of magnitude of our predictions. The binary nature of compact object mergers leads to the domination of events with long delay times, which would result in the peak of BBH mergers occurring after the peak star formation history. However, since the BBH merger rate is sensitive to metallicity and mostly occurs at low metallicity, this does not have to be the case. As we see in Table 2 and in Figure 11, only the TNG and Millennium predictions have their peak after the maximum SFR, while the empirical and EAGLE predicted BBH rates peak before. This indicates that most of the BBH events originate from low metallicity populations in the earlier Universe as expected. A more direct comparison is possible with recent results from GWTC-3, which includes estimates for a variety of population models at 𝑧 = 0 for non-evolving merger rates and at 𝑧 = 0.2 for redshift dependent rates (Abbott et al. 2021a). Figure 11 shows their range when only considering the lowest 5% and highest 95% credible boundaries out of the PDB (ind), MS, and BGP models (For a description of the models see Abbott et al. 2021a), whose ranges are shown in Figure 12. All predictions fall within the combined 90% credible interval from 16 to 130 yrGpcfor the non-evolving merger rate at 𝑧 = 0, although the Millennium and Empirical predictions are at the higher end of the observational range. However, MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) the merger rate increases over redshift and when this is taken into consideration the observed rate decreases to 17.3-45 yrGpc, as the bar at 𝑧 = 0.2 in Figure 11 shows. This combined credible interval has been constructed in similar fashion to that at 𝑧 = 0, but considers three BBH population models,PP, FN, and PS (For a description of the models see Abbott et al. 2021a), which evolve over redshift. At 𝑧 = 0.2 the observational constraints from Abbott et al. (2021a) are the strongest and the combined 90% credible range from their collection of models lies below the predicted merger rates, despite that the simulations with a fast enrichment, the EAGLE and TNG simulations, approach upon this range, which shows the strong correlation between the BBH rate and metallicity evolution. More detail can be obtained by looking at the speciﬁc population models used by Abbott et al. (2021a) instead of looking at the combined credible interval. The conversion from measured to intrinsic rates introduces several model-dependent uncertainties in the BBH rate and can move the observed rate both towards and away from our predictions. For the constant merger rate at 𝑧 = 0, shown in the left-most panel in Figure 12, the majority of uncertainty in the credible interval comes from the Mixed-Source model, while the other models are clustered around the same rate of ∼ 30. The predicted rates from the empirical prescription and Millennium simulation are an order of magnitude higher than these observed rates. Only the TNG and EAGLE simulation are close to this range, but still overestimate the predicted BBH merger rate compared to the PDB (ind) model by a factor 2.0 and 2.2, respectively. The fact that the TNG simulation also overestimates the ﬁducial evolving observed rate (PP) by 1.9, indicates a systematic overprediction. This might be an eﬀect of the details of the assumed populations compared to BPASS, where more low mass black holes are formed (Ghodla et al. 2021), thus resulting in our predicted rates for BBH mergers being too high. On the other hand, Abbott et al. (2020) also found that the BBH rate increases with a factor 2.7between 𝑧 = 0 and 𝑧 = 1, which lies between the predicted values from the Millennium (2.3), TNG (2.4), empirical (3.1), and EAGLE (3.5) predictions, indicating that the rate only requires a small downward adjustment to within the observed range that can be achieved by the following methods: First, the BBH merger rate is sensitive to the environmental parameters, such as the star formation rate and metallicity evolution in the early Universe (Dominik et al. 2013; Mapelli et al. 2017; Lamberts et al. 2018; Mapelli et al. 2019; Santoliquido et al. 2020b; Artale et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2020; Neĳssel et al. 2019), where the diﬀerences between SFH in our simulations are most apparent. This eﬀect is already apparent in the predicted rates with the TNG and EAGLE simulation having a faster enrichment and lower BBH rates. An even faster increase in mean metallicity could reduce the BBH cosmic rate further, but this would also increase the overpredicted Type Ib/c fraction and further underestimate the LGRB rate. Although the constraints on the observed fraction and LGRB rate are limited, we should also focus on other inﬂuences on the cosmic BBH merger rate, such as the assumed constant binary fraction over redshift and metallicity. For close binary systems with solar-type stars, the binary fraction decreases signiﬁcantly with metallicity (Moe et al. 2019). A similar relation might hold for massive stars, but the binary fraction is diﬃcult to infer from early Universe observations. The second area of interest is the physics and parameters assumed in the stellar evolution models. While BNS merger rate is most sensitive to these parameters, speciﬁc processes could contribute to a lower BBH rate but unchanged BNS rate. For example, altering the prescription used to predict SN outcomes (Dabrowny Figure 12. Observed BBH, BHNS, BNS merger rates from diﬀerent assumed population models by Abbott et al. (2021a). The BBH rates are given shown at 𝑧 = 0 for the non-changing distributions, while the credible range for the changing distributions is shown at 𝑧 = 0.2, where their error is the smallest. et al. 2021) or including Pulsation Pair-Instability (Belczynski et al. 2016; Farmer et al. 2019; Stevenson et al. 2019) can decrease the compact remnant masses, making it easier for systems to become unbound, thus, possibility reducing the BBH and BHNS rate. In the case of the latter, the pulsation pair-instability can even prevent black holes from forming. Other possibilities include a higher natal kick, a diﬀerent common envelope prescription (Santoliquido et al. 2020b; du Buisson et al. 2020; Marchant et al. 2021), or stronger stellar winds at low metallicity (Mapelli 2021, and references therein) can be implemented. However, this would alter the BNS rate, while not signiﬁcantly inﬂuencing the BBH rate. Finally, including GW190814 in the BBH merger rate can drastically change the observed intrinsic rate. For example, in Abbott et al. (2020) the inclusion of GW190814 changes the observed rate in our cosmology to 54Gpcyr, due to an increase in the expected number of low mass black holes resulting in nearly the same rate as predicted by the EAGLE and TNG simulations at 𝑧 = 0. The nature of GW190814, however, is an area of active discussion and the models by Abbott et al. (2020) do not extrapolate well to the GW190814 masses (M < 3M). Like the BBH population, the BNS rate has been directly measured at 𝑧 = 0 using gravitational wave measurements. While short gamma-ray burst can provide observations at higher redshift, the conversion from measurement to intrinsic rate suﬀers from a similar dependence on opening angle as LGRB. The intrinsic merger rate is mostly independent of metallicity (Tang et al. 2020; Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018), but is highly sensitive to the natal kick and Common Envelope Evolution prescription (Santoliquido et al. 2020b; Dominik et al. 2013; Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018). Figure 13 shows that all four predictions lie within the maximum credible region at Figure 13. Binary Neutron Star merger rate with maximum credible range at 𝑧 = 0 from Abbott et al. (2021a). 𝑧 = 0, which is a positive sign for the implemented physics model. Breaking down the measured interval further in Figure 12, we see that the rates fall within the boundaries of most populations models considered by Abbott et al. (2021a), expect for the PDB (pair) model, which has a higher BNS merger rate than any of the models predict. Our predictions agree with the other population models, but no environmental prescription is preferred by the BNS rate, which Figure 14. The observed maximum credible range of the BHNS merger rate at 𝑧 = 0 .2 from (Abbott et al. 2021a) compared against the TNG, EAGLE, Millennium, and empirical predictions. is as expected since it is mostly independent of environmental parameters. Instead better constraints can be placed by looking at the BNS chirp mass distribution and surviving BNS systems, however such comparisons go beyond the scope of this paper. After observations from Abbott et al. (2021b) produced a weak constraint on the BHNS merger rate, Abbott et al. (2021a) improved upon this by using a joint-analysis of the BBH, BHNS, and BNS populations with multiple population models. As shown in Figure 14, all predictions lie within the maximum credible region of the models considered, although similar to the BBH merger rate, the empirical and Millennium predictions are at the higher end of this range. The majority of the uncertainty in the rate, this times comes from the PDB (pair) model, as can be seen the second panel to the right of Figure 12. Similar to the BBH rates, the EAGLE and TNG prediction, are better estimators of the observed rate, which is most likely a result of the low metal-poor star formation rate, since black hole formation is dependent on the metallicity of the star formation environment (Mapelli 2021). However, the diﬀerence is more pronounced in the BBH rate than the BHNS rate, which agrees with the ﬁnding of Broekgaarden et al. (2021) that show a stronger inﬂuence of the stellar physics on the BHNS rate than the star formation environment. The interplay between the cosmic BBH, BHNS, and BNS rates is essential in ﬁnding the exact origin of the high black hole formation estimation, but requires further investigation into the inﬂuence of the remnant mass determination, mass transfer eﬃciency, and natal kick. MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) Individually, each transient rate prediction only provides limited information about the diﬀerent factors that aﬀect it, but taken together it becomes possible to disentangle these inﬂuences. To this end, we have performed a reduced 𝜒calculation on the electromagnetic event rates with observation available expect the LGRB rates. The reason for this exclusion is the fact that the geometrical parameters for the observed rate normalisation are ﬁtted using the same metallicity distribution and a similar CSFRD as our empirical prescription. They will therefore be biased towards the empirical CSFRD. Looking at the combined reduced 𝜒of the electromagnetic transients in Table 3, the TNG simulation has the closest 𝜒to 1 with a value of 0.86, followed by a reduced 𝜒of 0.74 by the EAGLE simulation, while the empirical and Millennium predictions have reduced 𝜒of 0.58 and 0.51, respectively. Although the TNG simulation provides the best match to the data, the limited diﬀerence in reduced 𝜒values do not allow us to distinguish between the predictions. The compact objects are excluded in the 𝜒calculation, because there is no robust method to included the credible intervals without knowing their distributions. Instead, we look at these rates qualitatively by considering the population models in Abbott et al. (2021a) with each having its advantages and disadvantages that can drastically alter the observed rates. For example, the ﬁducial BBH population model (PP) evolves over redshift, but does not consider the NS masses as part of the same population. On the other hand, the PDB (ind) model ﬁts the BH and NS masses, but assumes a nonevolving merger rate over redshift. To show the inﬂuence of these assumptions, we showed in Figure 12 the rates for each population model and compared them against the predicted GW rates in Section 5.5. Here, we consider all gravitational wave transients simultaneously and, while the BNS does not provide additional constraints due to the limited observations and, thus. the wide credible interval, we see that the Millennium simulation and empirical prescription overestimate the BBH and BHNS merger rates for the majority of the population models. The EAGLE and TNG predictions, on the other hand, best approximate the observed BBH, BHNS, and BNS merger rates independently of the used population model. This difference is most likely caused by the metallicity distributions and diﬀerences in CSFRD. The fact that even these BBH predictions are outside the 90% credible interval for some population models indicates that the BBH rate is overestimated by BPASS, as discussed in Section 5.5.1. Because the CSFRD of the Millennium simulation aligns with SFR observations at 𝑧 < 2, short delay time events, such as PISNe and CCSNe, are reasonably well predicted at these redshift. However, at higher redshift the CSFRD does not align with SFR observations and these estimated rates deviate from the other predictions. This is not taken into account into our 𝜒calculation because of limited rate observations in this regime. For long delay time events, the inﬂuence of the CSFRD combines with the metallicity distribution. Metallicity independent event types, such as Type Ia and BNS, align with observations, indicating that the total amount of stellar material formed in the past is correct, but metallicity dependent events, like the BBH and BHNS, show that the SFR at early times, when there most low-metallicity star formation takes place, is too high resulting in overestimated cosmic rates. This is further motivated by the short delay time and metallicity dependent LGRB rate, whose shape over redshift does not align with that of the observations and peaks at an early redshift. The empirical CSFRD solves the SFR observation misalignment, but still has a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent metallicity distribution over redshift than the simulations, as shown in Figure 3. Its slow metallicity increase over redshift leads to the overestimation of the BBH and BHNS merger rates, since the low-metallicity star formation at early times is a primary indicator for the BBH rates (Neĳssel et al. 2019). The EAGLE and TNG simulations, on the other hand, are able to better estimate the observed BBH and BHNS rates due to faster enrichment in the early Universe, even when considering an evolving BBH merger rate. Although subject to model uncertainties, this means that more detailed observations of the BHNS and BBH rates can be used to constraint the metallicity-speciﬁc CSFRD at high redshift, where observations of metallicity-speciﬁc SFRs are limited, providing us with a more complete understanding of the Universe. While the EAGLE and TNG simulations are able to reduce the BBH and BHNS rates compared to the empirical and Millennium CSFRD predictions, the estimates remain high, since only isolated binary formation is considered. In reality, a mixture of isolated systems and dynamical interactions in globular clusters, young stellar clusters, nuclear clusters, isolated triples, and systems in active galactic nuclei disks will contribute to the total cosmic merger rates (Zevin et al. 2021; Santoliquido et al. 2020b; Gallegos-Garcia et al. 2021; Bouﬀanais et al. 2021, and references therein for dynamical interactions). Consequently, even when considering the EAGLE and TNG simulations, the BBH and BHNS rates are high and have to be reduced further. This can be achieved by altering the natal kick, mass transfer eﬃciency, or common envelope prescription, as described in Section 5.5.1, and possible diﬀerences in mass distributions could identify areas of improvement (Ghodla et al. 2021; Mapelli et al. 2019). However, we would like to point out that in BPASS v2.2.1, the merger time for compact objects is calculated using the mean of a collection of systems instead of each individual system. This could result in more systems merging within the Hubble time that otherwise would not. The individual calculation will be implemented in a future version of BPASS. Besides the overestimation of the BHNS and BBH rates, the EAGLE and TNG simulations have high Type Ib/c fractions at 𝑧 = 0 compared to the empirical and Millennium predictions due to the higher mean metallicity resulting in stronger stellar winds (e.g. Vink et al. 2001). Moreover, they also are signiﬁcantly higher than observed by Shivvers et al. (2017) and Perley et al. (2020) indicating too high a typical metallicity at low redshift. Additionally, the short delay-time low-metallicity dependent PISN and LGRB rates are underestimated compared to observations, and from the lower Type Ib/c fraction from the Millennium and empirical CSFRD, which have a lower mean metallicity near 𝑧 = 0. Together, these results indicate that either the metallicity is too high at these redshifts, or the strength of the stellar winds is too high, both resulting in more Type Ib/c and less PISN and LGRBs. It is, however, important to mention that available observations for the Type Ib/c fractions, PISN and LGRB rates are currently limited, but that the continuation of surveys from the Zwicky Transient Facility (Perley et al. 2020) and ATLAS (Smith et al. 2020) will provide better constraints on the Type Ib/c fractions and SLSN observations=, while next generation observational facilities, such as THESEUS, will be able to detect large samples of GRBs at 𝑧 > 6 (Tanvir et al. 2021). With these future observations, it might become possible to distinguish between the similar EAGLE and TNG predictions and provide us with more understanding of the metallicity at high redshift. Moreover, the distributions of event rates at 𝑧 = 0 over metallicity, shown in Figure 15, is another method to constrain the CSFRD and metallicity evolution. The distributions are all relatively similar, except for the EAGLE simulation, which stands out due to relative high event rates originating from regions of star formation with a metallicity below 𝑍 = 5 × 10. A possible explanation might be a larger and more equal spread of star formation over metallicity in the EAGLE CSFRD, although Figure 3 does not provide a clear answer to this question, since the distributions of the EAGLE and TNG look similar at low redshift. There are three main sources of uncertainty in this work: the interference of volumetric rates from observations, the cosmological simulations, and the stellar modelling. We have already touched upon a variety of uncertainties in observations, since they are essential in testing our predictions, but observations at high redshift remain limited and complex, although future surveys will allow for better constraints. The stellar models used in creating the DTDs used in their study are from BPASS. The uncertainties inherent in the assumed physics within these stellar models and the population synthesis undertaken to combine them is common to all such codes. For example, within BPASS, the Type Ia rate is dominated by single degenerate events, while Ruiter et al. (2009) and Mennekens et al. (2010) predict the double degenerate channel to be dominant. The balance between these pathways depends on mass-loss rates, metallicity, and binary fraction. Ruiter et al. (2009) only looks at a metallicity of 𝑍 = 0.02 and a binary fraction of 50%. Mennekens et al. (2010) uses the same metallicity, but with a binary fraction of 100% and alterations to the mass transfer eﬃciencies. Moreover, BPASS does not include the eﬀects of magnetic wind braking, and its inclusion might shift the Type Ia rate (Eldridge et al. 2017; Stanway & Eldridge 2018). These inherent uncertainties in the assumed physics of the stellar models propagate to uncertainties in the predicted transient rates. Nonetheless, we note that the BPASS results have been validated and tested against a wide range of observations beyond just astrophysical transients providing conﬁdence in the predicted DTDs and they are therefore suﬃciently accurate to study the large scale trends presented in this work (Eldridge et al. 2017; Stanway & Eldridge 2018, and references therein) . The ﬁnal area of uncertainty comes from the cosmological simulations. Due the age of the semi-analytical Millennium simulation, it is unable to reproduce several observational constraints (Croton et al. 2006; Oliver et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2014) and the cosmic rates. The newer hydrodynamic simulations, on the other hand, are able to reproduce a number of observed distributions (See Schaye et al. 2015; Crain et al. 2015; Springel et al. 2018; Nelson et al. 2018; Pillepich et al. 2018a; Naiman et al. 2018; Marinacci et al. 2018) and have better estimates for the cosmic transients rates due to the presence of a SFH and metallicity evolution per galaxy. These are signiﬁcant beneﬁts of the cosmological simulations compared to the empirical prescription, but they do have some drawbacks. The detail of the large scale cosmological simulations does not provide information about the structure and metallicity distribution within the galaxy limiting us to the average metallicity of the galaxy. In reality, the centre and outer regions of Figure 15. The event rate distribution at 𝑧 = 0 over metallicity for each of the four environment prescriptions. The transformation from metallicity to the O/H ratio is performed using the method in Chrimes et al. (2020). galaxies have diﬀerent abundances (Metha & Trenti 2020; Metha et al. 2021), primarily impacting the metallicity dependent rates. Furthermore, the metallicity evolution of the cosmological simulations is formed through enrichment processes, such as supernova feedback. To account for these processes, internal deﬁnitions for diﬀerent supernova types are assumed. For the TNG simulation, these align with observations as shown by Naiman et al. (2018), but are diﬀerent than predicted by the BPASS models. While the Millennium and EAGLE simulations do not have explicit SN rates, they do use prescriptions that depend on the fraction of massive stars ending their life in a stellar explosion by which they determine MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2020) the metallicity evolution and stellar growth of galaxies in the simulations (Katsianis et al. 2017; Croton et al. 2006). The predictions using the BPASS models can lead to a diﬀerent stellar rate, as with the TNG simulation, and therefore alter the enrichment in the simulation. Thus, for a self-consistent model, the SNe feedback would have to be modelled using the BPASSS supernova rates. There are two more elements of the simulations that inﬂuence the outcome of the predicted rates. First of all, the internal star formation in the TNG, EAGLE, and Millennium simulations assume a Chabrier IMF (De Lucia & Blaizot 2007; McAlpine et al. 2016; Pillepich et al. 2018a), while the BPASS DTDs used originate from a Kroupa IMF. This discrepancy could result in a deviation in the predicted rates, but the diﬀerence would be small since the observational correction from luminosity to SFR between the Kroupa and Chabrier IMF is minimal (Madau & Dickinson 2014). The second internal component is the assumed cosmology in the simulation. While some hydrodynamic simulations are completely scale free and independent of the Hubble parameter, more sophisticated simulations require absolute values for processes, such as cooling and SN feedback (Croton 2013). These dependencies cannot be removed as we have done with the volume and will introduce variations in the predicted rates due to the cosmology. However, its inﬂuence is small, especially since the cosmologies from the EAGLE and TNG simulations are similar to the assumed value in this paper. Since the Millennium simulation is a semi-analytical model, it does not suﬀer the same dependence. In this paper, we have predicted electromagnetic and gravitational wave cosmic transient rates using detailed stellar models from BPASS and four prescriptions of the star forming environment from well-known cosmological simulations. These include an empirical prescription and three numerical models originating from the Millennium, EAGLE, and Illustris-TNG simulations, which provide detailed SFH and metallicity evolution for each simulated galaxy over the history of the Universe. These additional details lead to signiﬁcantly diﬀerent cosmic transient rate prediction, which we compared against observations and against each other, focusing on the diﬀerence between the simulations and the empirical prescription. (i) There are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the predicted rates from the empirical model and those from the cosmological simulations. The predicted rates are most diﬀerent when the delay-times distribution for the events are extended and/or when the rates are highly metallicity dependent. This result suggests that care should be taken in choosing which cosmic star formation history to use, especially how the metallicity evolution is modelled when predicting transient rates. Those that are most sensitive are events with long, > 1 Gyr, delay times and strong dependence on metallicity. (ii) The cosmological simulations have metallicity-speciﬁc CSFRD with reduced early star-formation and faster enrichment than the empirical prescription. Of the SFH considered, the Millennium simulation has the most uniquely shaped CSFRD, which does not agree with SFR observations, and has a near constant mean metallicity over redshift resulting in distinct cosmic transient rates. Compared to observations, the predictions from the Millennium simulation agree with the observations for the Type Ia, CCSN, PISN, and BNS rates, but overestimate the BHNS and BBH rates. The TNG and EAGLE simulation solve this overestimation with an increasing mean metallicity evolution and a observationally constraint CSFRD resulting in BHNS and BBH rates closer to observation irrespective of the assumed BH and NS population model, while at the same time the Type Ia, CCSN, and BNS rates are minimally aﬀected. However, the PISN and LGRB rates do decrease signiﬁcantly due to the higher metallicity, but the number of observations are limited or hard to constrain, although it might indicate that there is not enough low-metallicity star formation near 𝑧 = 0 or the used stellar wind prescription is too strong. (iii) We ﬁnd that the predictions of the empirical prescription, based on the CSFRD from Madau & Dickinson (2014) and metallicity evolution from Langer & Norman (2006), aligns well with observed CCSN and Type Ia rates from multiple surveys. Moreover, the predicted fraction of Type Ib/c at 𝑧 = 0 of 0.71 is similar to 0.722 found by Perley et al. (2020), and the predicted LGRB, PISN, and BNS rates align well, although the observations for the LGRB and PISN are not well constrained. Furthermore, the BHNS and BBH rates are signiﬁcantly overestimated compared to observations up to almost an order of magnitude. (iv) The additional detail in the metallicity-speciﬁc CSFRD provided by the TNG and EAGLE simulations result in good cosmic rate estimations across the board, but especially improves upon the BHNS and BBH rates compared to the standard empirical prescription. These new cosmological simulations have been improved to ﬁt a variety of observations. The semi-analytical models from the Millennium simulation, on the other hand, are older and unable to match the observed CSFRD over redshift. Together with the near ﬂat metallicity evolution, it results in signiﬁcant overestimation of the BBH and BHNS rate with minimal changes in the other rates compared to the empirical prescription. (v) In this paper we have only considered isolated binary evolution for the BBH and BHNS rates. The Universe has more than one way to make compact object mergers happen with the contribution of each pathway, such as isolated and dynamic formation still being undetermined. This means that even the better rate estimations from the EAGLE and TNG simulations for the BBH and BHNS rates are likely still too high. Adjustment of the CEE or natal kick, or inclusion of pulsation pair instability might be necessary for more accurate rate predictions. All together, we ﬁnd that the EAGLE and TNG simulation provide the best metallicity-speciﬁc CSFRD based on the predicted cosmic rates for electromagnetic and gravitational wave transients. The additional detail provides clear beneﬁts over the empirical prescription, closer matching the irregular and complex metallicity and SFR evolution of the real Universe, constraining environmental and evolutionary parameters. As the observational constraints improve over the coming decades for the star formation history and cosmic transients rates, we expect the true complexity of their variation over redshift to be revealed. MMB, JJE and HFS acknowledge support by the University of Auckland and funding from the Royal Society Te Apar¯angi of New Zealand Marsden Grant Scheme. ERS acknowledges support by the University of Warwick and funding from the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) through Consolidated Grant ST/T000406/1. We are grateful to the developers of python, matplotlib (Hunter 2007), numpy (Harris et al. 2020) and pandas (Reback et al. 2020). The BPASS project makes use of New Zealand eScience Infrastructure (NeSI) high performance computing facilities. New Zealand’s national facilities are funded jointly by NeSI’s collaborator institutions and through the Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment’s Research Infrastructure programme. 9 DATA AVAILABILITY Code and data products underlying this work are available at the organisational githuband website.