The theory can be summed up by saying that, given the psychology of the public, the level of output and employment as a whole depends on the amount of investment. I put it in this way, not because this is the only factor on which aggregate output depends, but because it is usual in a complex system to regard as the “causa causans” that factor which is most prone to sudden and wide ﬂuctuation. More comprehensively, aggregate output depends on the propensity to hoard, on the policy of the monetary authority as it aﬀects the quantity of money, on the state of conﬁdence concerning the prospective yield of capital assets, on the propensity to spend and on the social factors which inﬂuence the level of the money wage. Keynes [1] The years following 2008 were marked by the great ﬁnancial crisis, and with it a crisis for economic theory [2]. As for the great depression of the 1930s, there was a failure to predict the crisis amongst economic orthodoxy.Despite its failures in predicting the recession [10] or the sluggish recovery [11], the mainstream Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) class of models have remained the core macroeconomic framework and workhorse tool of policy [12]. While calls to reform these models have been made [8, 13, 14], the basic framework with a single rational representative agent often remains a baseline assumption when studying business cycles, although heterogeneous agents new Keynesian models (HANK) have recently been considered as well.The decisions of such a representative agent, which include capital investment decisions, determine the trajectory of the economy and are based on the optimisation of a utility function with static parameters, with no space for “animal spirits” or conﬁdence eﬀects (although see [18] and the discussion below). In such models, “dark corners” are absent and crises can only be the result of major exogenous shocks. This must be contrasted with Keynes’ intuition, which, as rephrased by Minsky [20], was that the subjective evaluation of prospects over a time horizon is the major proximate basis for investment and portfolio decisions, and these subjective estimates are changeable. Expectations can indeed be subject to rapid changes, disagreement and irrationality, as reﬂected in the high volatility of investment [21], and the abrupt nature of expansions and recessions. The investor behaviour behind these swings are indeed often referred to as animal spirits or irrational exuberance [22, 23]. There is now a rich literature on irrational behaviour across economics (see [24] for a recent review). However, it has not been fully dovetailed into more traditional business cycle models. One can ﬁnd some boundedly rational components in DSGE models, such as [26–28] that focus on learning in expectations formation in a single-actor model, as well as [29, 30] that use various diﬀerent utility speciﬁcations in DSGE. But apart from Refs. [18, 31, 32], there is surprisingly little work attempting to factor conﬁdence or sentiment into the DSGE framework as an explicit variable. This is despite some empirical work suggesting that consumer conﬁdence contains important information for forecasting personal spending and consumption [33–35]. Whereas the adapted New Keynesian model of Barsky and Sims [18, 32] conﬂates conﬁdence with forecasting with imperfect signals, or private news about future technological states, we rather want to focus here on Keynes’ animal spirit, self-reﬂexive facet of conﬁdence, which can be subject lead to abrupt shifts like in 1929 or 2008.As a ﬁrst step to incorporate such eﬀects and assess their impact on the economy, some of us [40] recently proposed a generalisation of a simple monetary model in which the household’s propensity to consume depends on the prior state of the economy, which generates either optimism or anxiety. This feedback can amplify productivity shocks, and lead to the appearance of a second equilibrium characterised by low consumption and high unemployment, and crises resulting from self-induced conﬁdence collapse. The existence of two very diﬀerent macroeconomic equilibria has also been recently suggested in another context FIG. 1. Trajectories of the OECD conﬁdence index, changes in consumption [‰], and investment [%] in the United States over a period from the beginning of 2000 to the present. The data were taken from FRED and OECD. in [41]. In the present paper, our aim is to signiﬁcantly extend the work of [40] by including capital investment as a factor determining the trajectory of the economy. We assume that capital and labour are essentially nonsubstitutable, and posit a behavioural rule for investment that accounts for both consumer conﬁdence and for the quality of the returns generated by risky capital investment. This expanded framework allows us to investigate the joint dynamics of conﬁdence, capital availability and output. In a nutshell, our model attempts to capture many of the ideas so clearly expressed by Keynes in the opening quote above, while keeping part of the scaﬀolding of standard business cycle models. In fact, one of our motivations for building such behavioural business cycle models stems from the Great Recession, sparked by Lehman’s bankruptcy that led to a sudden collapse in the conﬁdence of both households and investors. This was followed by an almost immediate downfall of both investment and consumption. These stylized facts can be observed in Figure 1. It took six years to recover to prior conﬁdence levels, even as investment and consumption grew in the medium-term. It is diﬃcult to believe that the Great Recession was the result of a major exogenous shock.Rather, Keynes’ story assigning the abruptness of the crisis to a shift in investment decisions is much more plausible. Indeed, anecdotal evidence reported by prominent actors at the time strongly suggests that conﬁdence collapse played an essential role in the unfolding of the crisis – see the riveting account of Ben Bernanke et al. in [44]. The consumption and investment trajectories generated by our model can be grouped into four distinct categories diﬀerentiated by the prevalence of crises in consumption and the scarcity of capital for production. We recover the bi-stable behaviour obtained in Ref. [40], alternating between enduring spells of high and low conﬁdence. In addition, the household’s investment behaviour can lead to capital scarcity, i.e. periods where capital is the limiting factor to output. During these instances there is an increased risk of a conﬁdence collapse and an ensuing low-consumption depression where the household consumes a small fraction of disposable income and invests cautiously. Furthermore, when compared with the results of our previous version of the model where capital is absent (or rather, assumed to be so abundant that keeping track of it is unnecessary), we ﬁnd that low output periods can last orders of magnitude longer. This is because, in the absence of suitable policy measures, investment remains low and capital scarcity prevents the economy from recovering. This multiple equilibria scenario is an attempt to move away from the over-simpliﬁed, but still dominant single equilibrium paradigm, following recent calls to that eﬀect [14, 45]. Note that the coexistence of diﬀerent equilibria is also the hallmark of recent agent based models, see e.g. [46, 47] and refs. therein. The qualitative results of our behavioural business cycle model suggests various policy measures, in terms of narratives [48] that may change the perception of the future of the economy and the attractiveness of investment in productive capital. In particular, we emphasise the crucial need to maintain capital investment at a suﬃciently high level throughout crisis periods, in order to allow for a quick recovery when the economic conditions improve. The manuscript is organised as follows. In Section II we build up our business cycle model based on [40], and outline our two novel additions. We then show the various dynamics the model can generate an reveal its phase diagram in Section III. We discuss in particular how capital scarcity increases the probability of consumption crises, and lead to a multifold increase of the recovery time (see Section III G). Section IV concludes by discussing the policy implications of our ﬁndings, and the avenues for possible extensions of the model. The framework presented here hybridises some standard assumptions used in the New Keynesian Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) model (see [49]) with plausible behavioural assumptions about consumption propensity and investment strategies. The environment is based on two blocks: the representative consumer and the representative ﬁrm. At this point, we neglect inter-temporal eﬀects and do not attempt to model inﬂation dynamics and monetary policy, although these features could be included at a later stage. Nonetheless, the phenomenology of our model is already quite rich and needs to be streamlined before exploring further the dynamics of prices. All variables and notations are reported in Table I. The household sector derives utility from a composite consumption good and provides labour services to the ﬁrm. At each time t, the representative household maximises its instantaneous utility, where cand ndenote respectively the level of aggregate consumption and the aggregate amount of working hours the household provides to the ﬁrm, Gis the (time dependent) propensity to consume out of income, and γ is the disutility of labour (which we ﬁx to 1 for the numerical analysis). Each period, the household faces a budget constraint given by its real income I, which is funded by three sources: (i) the real wage rate w paid by the ﬁrm for a unit of labour n, (ii) the real value of the maturating single-period bonds b, purchased at time t − 1 at the price (1 + r)and paying (1 + π)at time t, where ris the interest rate and πis the inﬂation rate, and (iii) the realised yield qper unit of real capital kthat the ﬁrm pays to the household in return for investment. We henceforth assume a constant interest rate r = 0.15% and inﬂation π = 0.1%, keeping in mind a unit time scale corresponding to a month or quarter. Total spending, correspondingly, consists in good consumption (with the price of good set to unity), purchases of new bonds and topping up the ﬁrm’s capital. Maximisation of the household’s utility (Eq. (1)) leads to the familiar state equation describing the trade-oﬀ between consumption and labour in the current period t. Interestingly, Eq. (3) can also be interpreted in a way that lends itself to a natural generalisation for investment decisions. Suppose one starts with a time independent utility function, Eq. (1) with G≡ 1, which is now FIG. 2. A schematic representation illustrating the division of income, i.e. the budget constraint, by the household. optimised under the constraint that the total budget devoted to consumption is a ﬁxed fraction G∈ [0, 1] of the income I, i.e. It is easy to show that the very same equation Eq. (3) immediately follows. We posit that the remaining fraction 1 − Gof income is invested in bonds and capital, i.e. where a fraction F· i(with F∈ [0, 1]) is allocated to productive capital, and the remainder (1 − F) · iis invested in bonds – see Fig. 2 for a pie chart summarising the household spending and investment decision. The capital level available to the ﬁrm thus evolves as where δ is the capital depreciation rate. The remaining investment is allocated to bonds at price (1 + r), so The quantities Gand Faim to capture conﬁdence effects and the attractiveness of risky capital investment, respectively, and are speciﬁed in section II E below. The economy’s productive sector is made up of a single representative ﬁrm, which transforms labour nand capital kinto a composite good yconsumed by the representative household. The ﬁrm’s production technology is given by a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) function with constant returns to scale, where α = 1/3 is the capital share in production, 1/(1 + ρ) is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labour with ρ > 0, and z> 0 is a stationary exogenous technological process. It is given by z= ze, where z follows an AR(1) process: with ﬁrst-order autocorrelation η, which aﬀects the correlation time of the technology shocks. (In the following we will ﬁx η = 0.5, corresponding to a correlation time of a few months). The base level zcorresponds to the most probable value of productivity. Note, importantly, that zhas units of [Time], i.e. the amount of goods that can be produced per unit time for a given level of capital and labour. As our focus is on economic ﬂuctuations, we abstract from production growth in the present model, i.e. the secular dependence of zon time. The CES production function nests two important limits that aﬀect economic dynamics. As ρ → 0, the production function becomes perfectly elastic and recovers the Cobb-Douglas form (y= znk), whereas in the limit ρ → +∞ the ﬁrm produces via an inelastic Leontief function (y= zmin(n, k)).Throughout the following, we choose ρ = 7, corresponding to a near Leontief limit, i.e. a very small amount of substitutability between capital and labour. We will brieﬂy comment in section III G the impact of higher substitutability. The ﬁrm maximises its target proﬁt P with respect to the labour supply nand the capital level k, where pis set to unity and correspondingly wis the real wage and qis the real rent on capital. Under the assumption that the market clears, i.e. one ﬁnds FIG. 3. The ﬁgure shows the behaviour of rescaled consumption ˜c, wages ˜w, and rent on capital ˜qas a function of k, in the Leontief limit, i.e. ρ → +∞. Note the qualitative changepp of behaviour between k>G/2γ and k<G/2γ. where, generically, ˜x := x/z. Note that, as it should be, wages, consumption and rent on capital are all in units of z, i.e. unit time scale (e.g. a month or a quarter). Combining the household’s state equation, Eq. (3) and the equation for the real wage, Eq. (12), the consumption level cmust satisfy As both sides of Eq. (14) are monotonous, this ensures a unique solution for any given level of capital kand consumption rate G. As expected, the consumption at time t increases if the capital kis increased and/or the consumption rate Gis increased. In this section we discuss in detail the Leontief limit of the equations derived in the previous section. Such an analysis will greatly help understanding the dynamics of the model that will be described below. Assume ﬁrst that ˜c< kand ρ → ∞. Then (˜c/k)→ 0 and one ﬁnds In this regime one ﬁnds, using Equation (3): which once plugged back in Equation (12) leads to Since ˜c< k, one concludes from Eq. (13) that the rent on capital ˜qis exponentially small. Intuitively, as labour is the limiting factor, consumption is directly proportional to how much the household chooses to work and the productivity at that time, while capital has no distinct eﬀects on the economy. We introduce the notation β:= 2kγ/Gfor further use. We hypothesise that the solution for ˜cin this regime is of the form where x= O(1) is to be determined. Plugging in Eq. (14), we ﬁnd: or, for ρ → +∞, The equation for ˜qthen leads to which indeed vanishes when β= 1, correctly matching the regime where capital is plentiful, whereas ˜qtends to unity when β→ 0, i.e. where k→ 0. With ˜c= ke, one ﬁnds from Equation (3) Finally, plugging into the equation for wages, or in the limit ρ → ∞, and hence n= k+O(ρ). Again, this solution matches with the result ˜w= 1 obtained for β≥ 1. A summary sketch of the above results is provided in Fig. 3, as available capital kis varied. Part of the dynamical properties of our model can be inferred from this ﬁgure: when capital is lush, return on capital is small and investment decreases (i.e. Fdecreases). If investment falls below the level of capital depreciation δ, thenp kwill fall until the levelG/2γ is reached. At this point, return on capital qincreases, promoting investment. When consumption propensity Gincreases, k may fall behind, again leading to an increase of q. Hence we expect a regime where the economy stabilises close top the point where k≈G/2γ, where capital and labour are tracking each other, and interest on capital and wages are neither very small, nor saturated to their maximum value w= q= z. Rigidity and costs to capital usage are typically introduced through adjustment costs to capital utilisation (e.g. see [50]). In this paper we take a diﬀerent route. Rather than empowering the household to choose the ﬁrm’s utilisation rate, we suppose the household invests in capital and gives operational control of capital to the ﬁrm. In exchange it is promised a return qper unit capital and per unit time scale (month or quarter). However, as the volatility of the stock-market attests to, such a return is not assured. Hence, we introduce an intrinsic state-dependent risk to the returns on capitalξ ∈ [0, 1] as a modiﬁer, such that the rate actually paid by the ﬁrm is: where ξ is distributed as where parameter a controls the intensity of the risk. Note indeed that E[ξ] = a/(1 +a) and V[ξ] = a/(2+a)(1 +a). Hence the larger the value of a, the more p(ξ) is concentrated around ξ = 1 (full payment). This formulation of risk implies that the representative ﬁrm pays out at most the marginal productivity of capital, but more likely only pays a fraction of this, corresponding to an eﬀective description of ﬁnancial distress and bankruptcy within a representative ﬁrm setup. In most simulations we set a = 15, such that the return is on average 93.75% of the promised return. In an extended version of the model, the parameter a could itself be a function of the state of the economy (in particular of the availability of capital), but we will not consider this possibility here. The model laid out in Sections II A-II D contains two dynamic variables, the consumption rate Gin Eq. (4) and the investment allocation rate Fin Eq. (5), which have not been speciﬁed yet. These two variables are responsible for the feedback mechanisms which are at the core of the dynamical evolution of our model economy. Here we elaborate on these mechanisms and provide the economic intuition behind them. As in Refs. [31, 40], we postulate that the consumption rate G(or propensity, see section II A) is a function of the consumer conﬁdence index C, that we model as a real variable ∈ [−1, 1] and, possibly, on the diﬀerence between the expected inﬂation rate bπ:= E[π] and the bond rate r: where the dependence on the second variable is a way to eﬀectively encode the content of the standard Euler equation without explicitly introducing an inter-temporal optimisation of utility, and where the . . . leaves room to possible additional variables. But since in the present paper we assume both inﬂation and interest rates to be constant, the second variable will be dropped altogether. As far as the ﬁrst variable is concerned, we follow our previous work in [40], where we postulated that conﬁdence of a given household is impacted by the level of consumption of other households in the previous time step. In a mean-ﬁeld limit, this self-reﬂexive mechanism writes The parameter cis a “conﬁdence threshold” where the concavity of C(c) changes (if c< c, C is closer to 1 while if c> c, C(c) is closer to −1). Parameter θ> 0 sets the width of the consumption interval over which the transition from low conﬁdence to high conﬁdence takes place. One could introduce, as in e.g. [51–53], the impact of macroeconomic news as an extra contribution to the argument of the tanh function. This would describe how the consumer conﬁdence index is further modulated by some exogenous shocks, but we leave such an extension for future work. Back to the consumption rate G, we write where 0 ≤ G< G≤ 1 are the minimum and maximum proportions of income the household will consume. We ﬁx G= 0.05 to ensure the household will consume whenever its income is positive (necessary consumption). Similarly, we set G= 0.95 to account for a minimal form of precautionary savings in response to some uncertainty regarding the future. The intuition behind Eqs. (30) and (31) is that when consumption is above the threshold, c > c, there is high conﬁdence in the future of the economy, thereby a large fraction of income, G→ G, is consumed. High conﬁdence represents the belief that future income will be suﬃcient to maintain high consumption with a minimal amount of savings to sustain capital levels. Conversely, when consumption is below the threshold, c < c, the consumption rate collapses, G→ G. Following a shock or deterioration in consumption to below the conﬁdence threshold, there is uncertainty about the future economy and whether future consumption is assured. This induces the household to save more for the future, eﬀectively reducing the current demand. Economically, cis thus similar to minimal consumption: it deﬁnes the threshold beyond which there is a panic where the household’s “survival” is in question. The parameter θmodulates the households reaction to a breach of necessary consumption, and can be described as the household’s panic polarity. For high θ, the household requires only a relatively small shock below cto reduce the consumption rate to its minimum. This leads to a bi-stable savings behaviour with sharp transitions. Conversely, as θ→ 0 the household becomes unresponsive to the state of the economy, consuming half its income regardless of high or low preceding consumption. The intermediate levels of θdescribe the smoothness of the adjustment to consumption shocks. According to [40] there are four distinct “phases”, i.e. regions of qualitatively comparable dynamics, that are distinguished by the bi-stability of G. We can observe in particular a phase of high persistent consumption with no crises, high consumption with short downward spikes, or a phase with alternating periods of high consumption (booms) and low consumption (busts). In each period, the household must allocate its savings between one-period bonds and capital. It does so through an allocation decision Fbased on the household’s observation of the economy, and its beliefs about future risk and return. The novelty of our model lies in the behavioural foundation that determines the proportion of new investment dedicated to bonds, F. Investment beliefs are shaped by two factors: (i) an estimate of the expected risk-adjusted excess returns to capital investment, given by a Sharpe ratio S[54], and (ii) the current conﬁdence level Cabout the future state of the economy. The Sharpe ratio Sis an estimate of the risk-adjusted real return, q−δ, of investing capital in the ﬁrm versus holding risk-free bonds (b) paying r. It increases as the returns to capital increase or become less volatile. We assume that estimates of the future Sharpe ratio are only based on exponential moving averages of past (observable) realised returns, which is a form of extrapolative beliefs.In other words, i.e. the mean µand standard deviation σof the return stream are computed as (σ)= λ ·(σ)+ (1 − λ) · (q− µ)(33) with an exponential moving average deﬁned by a gain parameter λ ∈ (0, 1), corresponding to a memory time scale equal to T:= 1/|log λ|: a larger λ implies that a higher weight is given to recent observations. The factor N ≈ 1/4 is quite arbitrary, but chosen such that, when compared to the conﬁdence in Eq. (35) below, the two terms are of similar magnitude. (Note that this choice is in fact immaterial, since changing N is equivalent to rescaling the parameter ν deﬁned in Eq. (35) below.) The interpretation of the Sharpe ratio is as follows: a positive signal S> 0 suggests that the expected real return to capital investment exceeds the returns to risk-free bonds. The magnitude of Sis inversely proportional to the risk of capital investment, as measured by the estimated volatility σ. Thus in a high-volatility environment the signal might be positive but weak. The second indicator potentially inﬂuencing the household investment decision is the conﬁdence index, C, as previously deﬁned. In periods where the household has low conﬁdence, there is a reduced impetus to invest in risky assets because households wish to guarantee nextperiod income. These are often periods of crisis with a higher volatility in returns. Since bonds are risk-free, this leads to a higher allocation of funds to bonds, ceteris paribus. Conversely, higher conﬁdence about the future means more appetite for risk, and hence a higher fraction of the savings invested in the capital of ﬁrms and a lower fraction invested in bonds. We postulate that the propensity, F, to make risky bets is a function of the overall sentiment Σ, computed as a linear combination of the Sharpe ratio and of the conﬁdence: where ν ∈ [0, 1] is the weight the household gives to its estimates of risk-adjusted return Sand its conﬁdence level C. When ν = 1, the household’s conﬁdence plays no role in the investment rule. For positive Sharpe ratio and conﬁdence indicator, the sentiment is positive, Σ> 0, indicating a willingness to invest in risky capital. But if ν < 1 sentiment can turn negative even when the Sharpe ratio is high, because of a high level of anxiety about the future state of the economy, encoded as a negative value Finally, the unbounded sentiment Σis transformed into a portfolio allocation to capital F∈ [0, 1] via, where Fand Frepresent the maximum and the minimum proportion of total investment iinvested into bounded between F= 0 and F= 1, which precludes any divestment (or short-selling) of capital or bonds.The parameter θrepresents the sensitivity of the portfolio allocation to the agent’s sentiment and sets the width of the sentiment interval over which the capital allocation goes from Fto F, that is how polar the investment decision is. For θ→ ∞, the allocation becomes binary, leading to either F= Fwhen sentiment is negative or F= Fwhen sentiment is positive. In the following part, we ﬁx the sensitivities to a rather high value θ= θ= 15, such that the transitions between diﬀerent regimes are sharp. In this section we have set up a business cycle model incorporating two behavioural mechanisms: a self-reﬂexive consumption rate decision, already advocated in Ref. [40], and an investment allocation decision. The novelty of this paper lies in the behavioural foundation that determines the proportion of new risky investment F, which depends directly on three key parameters, λ, ν, θ, describing the “sentiment” of the household, i.e. its risk aversion. Falso indirectly depends on the risk intensity parameter a and the capital depreciation rate δ. The consumption decision depends on two parameters cand θthat deﬁne the household conﬁdence about its future welfare. In the following we discuss how the parameters of these two feedback mechanisms strongly aﬀect the model’s dynamics. Note that a very important parameter of the model is the baseline productivity z, which ﬁxes the scale of the consumption, wages and rent on capital (all per unit time scale). In the following, we choose z= 0.05, corresponding to an annual productivity of capital of 20% if the unit time step is a quarter and 60% if it is a month. Among all the parameters of the model, three have an interpretation in terms of time scales: • η, which appears in the dynamics of the productivity shocks, that we have ﬁxed to 0.5 thoughout this study, corresponding to a time scale T= 1/|log η| of a few months ; • λ, which is the gain parameter used by investors to estimate the Sharpe ratio of risky investments, corresponding to a time scale T= 1/|log λ|. Our default value will be λ = 0.95, corresponding to T≈ 20 or 5 years if the unit time is a quarter or a month respectively; • δ, the capital depreciation rate, which we choose in the range 0.001 – 0.02, corresponding to a typical replacement time of capital T= 1/|log(1 −δ)| ≈ 12 – 250 years when the unit time is a quarter, and three times less if it is a month. Hence δ = 0.001 means essentially no depreciation of capital. The role and the eﬀect of varying these timescales is studied in detail in Section III G. An important remark, at this stage is that, while our choice of one quarter as the unit time step is quite arbitrary, a combination of parameters that is crucial for the properties of the model is the dimensionless product z· T≈ z/δ, i.e. how much goods can be produced (per unit capital) over the life-cycle of capital. In this section we ﬁrst investigate numerically the phase diagram of our self-reﬂexive business cycle model and highlight the diﬀerent dynamical features that the model can generate. We choose as control parameters those which govern the behaviour of our two feedback mechanisms: the consumption propensity Gand the risky investment decision F. In order to navigate through the following paragraphs, let us explain in a nutshell what is expected to happen in the model. If a productivity shock causes conﬁdence to drop, consumption propensity Gand consumption both drop as well, whereas the saving rate 1 − Gincreases. Because consumption drops, unemployment rises and capital becomes superﬂuous, leading to a decrease of the rent on capital q. Because the fraction of savings invested in capital Fdepends both on q(through the Sharpe ratio) and on the level of conﬁdence (with a weight 1 − ν), the amount invested in risky capital, given by (1−G)·F·I can either increase (if the factor 1 −Gdominates) or decrease (if the factor Fdominates), depending on parameters and conditions. In the second situation, and if capital depreciation is fast, one may face a situation where consumption is impaired and capital becomes scarce at the same time, making recovery more diﬃcult and leading to long periods where the economy is trapped in a low output state. FIG. 4. This ﬁgure shows diﬀerent sections of the phase space. The three rightmost upper panels display the log of capital shortage Ξas a function of the Sharpe ratio weight ν and of the conﬁdence threshold c logprobability of consumption crises Ξas a function of the same parameters. The dark red zones correspond to the regions where Ξ> 0.99, where crises are permanent. Each column corresponds to a diﬀerent choice of the capital depreciation, from δ = 0.001 to δ = 0.02. We set a = 15 and σ= 0.15. As δ increases, the (H panel we have marked the points chosen to illustrate the diﬀerent phases of the model, together with their label (see text). The dynamics trajectories and the corresponding histograms are reported in Fig. 5. The two leftmost panels show another section of the phase space, varying log a and σ, with c= 0.017, ν = 1 and δ = 0.005 ﬁxed (the two solid dots there correspond to the same solid dots of the middle panels, in the HHphase). We focus on two distinct phenomena exhibited by our model: consumption crises and capital scarcity. • Consumption crises occur in periods where the household’s consumption, c, falls below its threshold, c. In other words, we have a low demand for consumption which leads the economy into a stagnating low-output state. The severity of such consumption crises is measured as where Θ(x ≥ 0) = 1 and Θ(x < 0) = 0 and T is the total simulation time. This indicator counts the fraction of time consumption cis low, weighted by the relative distance between cand c. • Since we are considering an economy deﬁned by low substitutability between capital and labour (i.e. ρ  1 in the CES production function), we deﬁne capital scarcity as the periods where production is determined by capital levels, i.e. k≤ n. The severity of capital crises is similarly measured as In a sense, one can consider these two phenomena as demand and supply crises. • In the consumption crisis state the household does not wish to spend on consumption, hence we see a low aggregate demand. Provided capital depreciation is low, this is also a state of excess capital (k > n) and low returns on capital. • In the capital scarcity state, the ﬁrm is bound in its production by the supply of capital, hence it can be viewed as a form of supply crisis. Both phenomena can be more or less frequent, and at ﬁrst glance unrelated, but closer scrutiny reveals that in some regions of parameters, these two types of crises interact with one another. To diﬀerentiate between characteristic behaviours we distinguish between four diﬀerent phases in the space of the parameters deﬁned by the values that the indicators Ξand Ξtake: (L, L), (L, H), (H, L), (H, H), where L and H represent the “low prevalence” and “high prevalence” of each phenomena c or k, respectively. There is however no strict deﬁnition of the boundary between high and low prevalence regimes. As a convention, we consider that the crisis prevalence is high when Ξ & 10. Given this setup, we ﬁrst focus on the eﬀects of three key parameters: the depreciation rate δ, the weight ν of the Sharpe ratio in the investment decision, and the consumption threshold c. Other parameters are ﬁxed to z= 0.05, λ = 0.95 (i.e. T= 20), a = 15 and σ= 0.15. Figure 4 presents heat-maps of the severity of capital crises logΞ(top) and consumption crises logΞ (bottom) across parameter combinations, where red indicates high prevalence. We show two representative sections of the parameter space: the planes (c, ν) (left) and (σ, a) (right). Since we present the logarithms of Ξ, the crossovers between high and low prevalence of diﬀerent phases are rapid but smooth, i.e. there are no sharp phase transitions that characterise the system’s behaviour. From each phase we study a point of the line ν = 1 and diﬀerent values of c(marked by points in Figure 4), with all other parameters ﬁxed and plot the dynamics of consumption c, labour n, capital k, and the measured Sharpe ratio Sin Figure 5. Note that changing the value of parameters (including ν) while staying in the same phase leads to qualitatively similar trajectories. As shown in Figure 5, leftmost column, the LLphase is characterised by a stable capital surplus, low interest on capital and rare consumption crises. The depreciation of capital δ is so small that even with a puny level of investment, capital is always in excess and labour is the limiting factor. The stable capital surplus, in combination with a low conﬁdence threshold c, means that productivity shocks zhardly ever reach the required magnitude to trigger a consumption crisis, and if it does, recovery is almost immediate. The corresponding bottom panel of Figure 5, shows that the consumption level has normal ﬂuctuations, entirely due to exogenous productivity shocks z, around a single high-consumption equilibrium. A corollary of the large capital excess is that the labour supply is nearly constant (extremely narrow-distribution in the LLpanel of Figure 5). As the depreciation rate δ increases, the average excess of capital supply over labour shrinks, increasing the prevalence of capital scarcity. Accordingly, the phase L quickly disappears upon increasing δ, leading to a pervasive HLphase (see e.g. Fig. 4, third column, which shows that capital is always scarce when δ = 0.02). As δ is further increased, the Lphase is more and more conﬁned to small values of c, i.e. when conﬁdence is intrinsically robust. The HLphase is characterised by persistent capital scarcity with rare consumption crises, and is conﬁned within a low c“band” in the (c, ν) plane when δ is large enough. Since cis low, conﬁdence of is generally high and therefore the household systematically consumes a large proportion Gof its income, leaving only a small share for investment. Because of capital depreciation,p the economy settles in a regime where k<G/2γ, meaning that production is limited by capital, wages are low and rent on capital is high (i.e. the left region in Fig. 3). Hence, the average consumption level is lower than the maximal consumption level reached in the LL phase – see Figure 5, second column. But since cis now closer to c, consumption crises are lurking around and the economy can ﬂip into the HH if cincreases and/or if productivity shocks are stronger (higher σ). This is clearly conﬁrmed by the phase diagram of Fig. 4. In fact, comparing the phase diagrams for δ = 0.005 and δ = 0.02, we see that faster depreciation of capital converts large swaths of HLphase into HH. Hence, in this case, investment crises (i.e. the supply side) do trigger consumption crises (i.e. the demand side) by reducing the diﬀerence between cand c – see also the discussion in section III E. When the depreciation rate is suﬃciently small but the conﬁdence threshold increases, capital remains abundant but self-reﬂexive conﬁdence crises can hurl the system into a low consumption, low employment regime as a result of random productivity shocks. This is the LH phase. Since capital is high, its level does not impact the level of production, and interest on capital is small. Hence the model becomes completely equivalent, in this regime, to the one studied in [40], where the dynamics is characterised entirely by the consumption propensity Gand is dominated by frequent consumption crises, induced by breakdown of collective conﬁdence. As argued in [40] and shown in Figure 5, third column, consumption then displays bi-stable dynamics, where high and low consumption regimes alternate. Correspondingly, the distributions of consumption and labour reveal a secondary peak centred around the lowconsumption equilibrium. Note that during consumption crises (i.e. G&) capital becomes even more abundant relative to labour (recallp that one needs to compare kwithG/2γ) and therefore return on capital and Sharpe ratio both fall, as can be seen in the pink shaded region of Fig. 5, third column. If we are in a region where consumption crises are short enough compared to both the time Tover which the Sharpe ratio is estimated and the capital depreciation time T, then one can avoid a capital crisis when conﬁdence comes back. Otherwise, the economy enters a Simulated pdf (log) FIG. 5. The upper panels show sample dynamics trajectories for each phase presented in Fig. 4 (marked by circles). In the topmost panels the solid black line corresponds to the consumption c respectively, the conﬁdence threshold cand the average consumption in the δ = 0 scenario. Grey (resp. pink) background indicate capital scarcity (resp. consumption crisis). The middle row presents the dynamics of capital k n(solid green) and Sharpe ratio S(solid grey, with levels shown on the right y-axis). The lower panels show the histograms of consumption (black dots) and labour (green crosses) in a log −log scale. The green (resp. grey) dashed curve corresponds to the δ = 0 baseline value for labour (resp. consumption), with cindicated as a vertical red line. In the H of consumption and labour become bi-modal, corresponding to high output and low output regimes. For all simulations ν = 1, a = 15, σ= 0.15. Speciﬁc parameters are LL: δ = 0.001, c c= 0.001, HH: δ = 0.005, c= 0.017. turbulent HHphase with both capital and consumption crises. This ﬁnal HHphase has both persistent capital scarcity and consumption crises. As anticipated above, capital crises can trigger consumption crises, because capital scarcity drives consumption closer to the conﬁdence threshold c, below which consumption drops and precautionary savings increase. One can then enter a doom loop (similar to Keynes’ famous paradox of thrift) where now capital is too high and leads to a reduction of incentive to invest away from bonds. Hence, as shown in the fourth column of Fig. 5, capital and labour ﬂuctuate around low levels, with intertwined periods of capital scarcity (grey regions) and high unemployment (pink regions). The Sharpe ratio gyrates rather strongly between log c& log nlog c& log n , while the dashed red and blue horizontal lines show, = 0.001, LH: δ = 0.001, c= 0.019, HL: δ = 0.02, negative values and values close to unity, with a significant negative skewness. The economy is unstable and always far from its optimal state. Recall that we have ﬁxed the interest rate on bonds to a constant value. But with a massive demand for bonds, as expected in the HHphase, one should expect the government to borrow at low rates and prop up the economy with public investment, a feature not modelled in the current framework, but certainly worth accounting for in a later version of the model. To summarise, we have identiﬁed four qualitatively different phases of the dynamics. Possibly the most interesting (and novel) one is HH, where capital scarcity is persistent, thereby triggering consumption crises. In this phase the economy is unstable, as capital becomes scarce the likelihood of a consumption crisis increases, and vice versa, low consumption drives rent on capital down and increases the risk aversion of investors. We have underlined the role of the capital depreciation rate δ in determining the fate of our model economy. In fact, when capital and infrastructure are sufﬁciently long-lived such that z· Tis large, the economy reaches a stable and prosperous state LL, provided self-induced conﬁdence crises are rare enough (i.e. csmall). Conversely, when z· Tis low, capital depreciates too quickly and this dents the rents that can be expected by investors. The economy quickly becomes under-capitalised and ineﬃcient, especially because the dearth of capital makes conﬁdence crises more probable, paving the way for the existence of a dysfunctional HH region in the phase diagram. In the previous section, we have explained how capital depreciation can cause instabilities, and the appearance of a HHphase where both capital and consumption undergo regular crises. In this section, we want to explore the inﬂuence of the memory timescale T, which is the history span over which investors assess the Sharpe ratio of capital investment, and of the sentiment parameter ν on the time needed for recovery when in a crisis period. We focus on this turbulent phase of the economy. We will ﬁx the other two timescales T, Tdeﬁned in section II F to, respectively, 200 and 2. Our benchmark will thus be the HHpoint in Fig. 4, corresponding to λ = 0.95, δ = 0.005, ν = 1 and c= 0.017 (with a and σalso ﬁxed at their baseline values). Looking at the statistics of the high consumption periods and of the low consumption periods, we conclude that the prosperous periods last a time Tof the order of T= 200 (data not shown), whereas crises are rather short, of the order of T≈ 10, see Fig. 6, plain vertical lines in the third graph of the bottom row, which corresponds to T= 20, i.e. λ = 0.95. The full distribution of T and of the Sharpe ratio S for ν = 1 are shown in light grey, and reveals that whereas its time averaged value of S is clearly positive and equal to hSi≈ 0.71, its full distribution is uni-modal but quite broad and negatively skewed. Fig. 6, left graphs shows the consumption crisis prevalence Ξand the average Sharpe ratio S as 1−ν (weighing conﬁdence in the investment allocation decision) and T are varied. One sees that decreasing ν or increasing T leads to an increase of Ξ, at least in the range shown, T. 300. The evolution of the average Sharpe ratio is more complex, reﬂecting the non-trivial shape of its distribution function (bi-modal and skewed, see below). But certainly as agents pay less attention to the actual return on capital and are more aﬀected by the level of conﬁdence, the average Sharpe becomes strongly negative (red region of the diagram) and the economy gets trapped forever in a low consumption, low investment regime where θΣ is negative (see Eq. (36)). Now, let us look at a cut along the direction ν = 0.75, corresponding to a 25% weight given to conﬁdence in the allocation decision, as Tis varied. For this particular value of ν, the average Sharpe ratio is close to zero and only weakly depends on T(Fig. 6, bottom left graph). But from the bottom row of Fig. 6, we see that when T& 10, the distribution of Sharpe ratios becomes bimodal and with a skewness that decreases as Tincreases. This can be rationalised as follows: • The peak corresponding to positive Sharpe ratios comes from prosperous periods, where consumption is high and capital relatively scarce, leading to a positive return on capital q: see Fig. 6, top right graphs: in the high consumption phase, the orange line (capital) is below the green line (labour). • The peak corresponding to zero Sharpe comes from crises periods, where capital is in slight excess of labour, leading to a small return on capital (see again Fig. 6, top right graphs, and section II C). • The fat left tail corresponding to negative Sharpes comes from the transitory periods between high conﬁdence and low conﬁdence, when consumption and labour collapse but capital depreciates much more slowly. In this case, return on capital plummets and the Sharpe ratio becomes negative. • As Tincreases, the weight of these transitory regimes in the estimate of the Sharpe ratio becomes small, and the fat left tail disappears, as crises become less frequent and much longer. Whereas the length of the prosperous periods Tis unchanged compared to the benchmark ν = 1 case for all values of T& 10, the length of the crisis periods T increases by more than a 100 times as ν is decreased from 1 to 0.75 (compare the grey line and the coloured points in bottom row in Fig. 6). The ﬁrst observation is due to the fact that the Sharpe ratio estimated when in a high output period is clearly in positive territory and quite insensitive to T(see the histograms in Fig. 6). This means that capital supply is also independent of Tand that the conﬁdence collapse mechanism must be identical to the one described in our previous work [40] and not triggered by a lack of investment. time scale Tand the weight parameter ν. The dark red zones correspond to the regions where Ξ permanent. The right set of panels shows snapshots of the dynamics of c formation (right), both for T= 20 and ν = 0.75. The two bottom rows show the histograms of Sharpe ratio S and crisis duration Tfor four values of T: 2, 10, 20 and 50, all for the same value of ν (shown as symbols in the two heat-maps on the left). The faded grey lines show the same histograms in the benchmark case ν = 1 that correspond to the H 4. Other parameters used are: δ = 0.005, c= 0.017, σ= 0.15 and a = 15. On the contrary, the mechanism by which conﬁdence is restored is strongly impacted by the value of the memory time T. When the economy is in a consumption crisis, the returns on capital are very small. Thus, averaged over a suﬃciently long time period, the Sharpe ratio is well deﬁned and also small (see the narrow peaks in the Sharpe ratio distribution in Figure 6). Combined with the low conﬁdence dampener on sentiment (1−ν)·C, this leads to a negligible investment ﬂow. So whereas positive productivity shocks should put the economy back on an even keel, the level of capital is lagging, which creates a ceiling that prevents consumption (and hence conﬁdence) from increasing substantially and returning to the high consumption case. Interestingly, the dependence of Ton Tis in fact non-monotonic. For very large T& 1000, the memory of prosperous periods persists even during the crises, so that the Sharpe ratio and investment always remain high. In such cases, Tabruptly drops back to small values . 5 (data not shown). With extremely small probability, however, the system remains trapped in a crisis forever. , kand n, corresponding to recovery (left) and crisis periods where consumption increases due to productivity shocks allow suﬃciently rapid increases in capital rent to encourage immediate investment. This is enough to prop up capital and allows conﬁdence to be fully restored as labour and consumption will grow with the limiting factor k. For an example of these positive spikes of consumption, see top centre panel in Fig. 6. The same eﬀect takes place if ν is increased back to 1, where only realised Sharpe aﬀects investment. In this case, the drag on capital due to low conﬁdence levels is absent, and the system is able to pull itself out of the rut much more eﬃciently, leading to shorter crisis periods. But for lower values of ν (higher impact of household conﬁdence on the investment propensity), the dearth of capital in crisis periods is such that the economy is unable to ever recover, i.e. T= +∞ for all purposes. From a policy point of view, reducing interest rates has the direct eﬀect of increasing the Sharpe ratio and reducing the return to bonds, thus promoting investment and making the transition back to the high consumption state easier. However, this may require the central bank to set interest rates r to negative values, as r which might already be close to zero due to prior crises. Besides monetary policy, other measures that improve conﬁdence (e.g. central bank messaging) and/or promote investment into productive capital would have a similar impact (for instance if the government decides on strong ﬁscal measures that include investment into productive capital, such as through mission-oriented policies or infrastructure spending). Finally, let us mention that while the existence of consumption crisis is independent of the substitutability parameter ρ, the duration of the low investment, low consumption periods is also highly sensitive to substitutability eﬀects. We have indeed found that when ρ is suﬃciently small, i.e. for production functions closer to Cobb-Douglas than to Leontief, recovery is much faster (data not shown). This could have been expected: lack of capital can now be compensated by labour, expediting the transition back to a prosperous state of aﬀairs. We have constructed a behavioural real business cycle model in which labour and capital are nearly unsubstitutable. In the model, consumption and investment are controlled by (a) the conﬁdence of households, which is self-reﬂexive (i.e. agents take cues from the consumption of other agents to determine their consumption budget) and (b) the quality of the excess real return to capital, as measured by the Sharpe ratio. As we have shown in our previous work [40], the self-referential nature of conﬁdence ampliﬁes the eﬀect of productivity shocks on output, and can lead to crises where consumption abruptly jumps from a high equilibrium level to a low equilibrium level. Depending on the parameters of the model, these crises can be more or less frequent, and the low consumption periods can be of various duration: short spikes (“V-shaped crises”) or long drawn-out phases (“L-shaped crises”). In the present study we investigate how the introduction of capital aﬀects these dynamical patterns. In our model, capital can either be abundant (in which case labour is the limiting factor to production) or scarce. The main factors determining the quantity of working capital are the depreciation rate and the propensity of the households to save and invest, which itself depends on the return on capital. The resulting phenomenology of the model is quite rich. Our analysis reveals the following main takeaways: 1. Higher capital depreciation rates, ceteris paribus, lead to capital scarcity and limit production. This makes the economy more prone to conﬁdence crises, increasing their prevalence; 2. Increasing the inﬂuence of the level of conﬁdence in capital allocation decisions creates a feedback loop similar to Keynes’ paradox of thrift, destabilising and trapping the economy into a non-optimal low consumption state; 3. The time during which the economy remains in a low output state is highly sensitive to the time span over which investors compute the Sharpe ratio. Increasing this memory timescale leads to sluggish adjustments of investment.Consequently, instantaneous increase of capital returns due to productivity upticks are not suﬃcient to boost the investment propensity. This leads to a persistence of capital scarcity, and prevents the economy from escaping the low output trap. Our ﬁndings have diﬀerent policy implications. As already emphasised in our previous paper [40], if selfreﬂexive feedback loops exist, then governments and monetary authorities should not only manage inﬂation expectations but more broadly conﬁdence in the future prospects of the economy. Although conﬁdence indices are routinely measured by polling institutes (see e.g. Fig. 1 in Section I), the inclusion of such indices in macroeconomic DSGE models and the importance of narratives [48] have never really been considered seriously beyond the impact of news shocks on productivity. Beyond communication and narratives, our model suggests that monetary authorities should also directly promote investment, in particular during recessions. This is needed to prevent the economy being trapped in a low output, low conﬁdence environment. Although this conclusion looks perfectly intuitive, our model reveals that a lack of capital can prolong crisis periods by orders of magnitude, and convert V-shaped crises into L-shaped crises. Boosting investment in working capital can be done through traditional channels, by lowering the riskfree interest rate (possibly making it negative) or by direct Keynesian investments in infrastructure and in innovation, which have the double eﬀect of increasing the productivity of capital and propping up household conﬁdence. There are of course many directions in which our model should be extended and improved. The ﬁrst obvious one is to allow interest rates and inﬂation to be dynamical variables, and to introduce an explicit monetary policy with the central bank monitoring inﬂation and conﬁdence. A fully developed DSGE model building upon the framework proposed here would be welcome. Other relevant extensions could be to include a feedback mechanism between conﬁdence and the time scale Tor the sentiment parameter ν. This would allow potentially relevant panic eﬀects to set in the model, and capture what happened in 2008, for example. Another possible extension is to allow the parameter a which describes the default risk on capital to depend on the state of the economy, since bankruptcies are more frequent when the economy is in a low output, low investment regime. Last, but not least, we have assumed that conﬁdence is only a function of past realised output, but other factors should obviously be taken into account to model the dynamics of the conﬁdence index, in particular ﬁnancial news (like in 2008) or geopolitical news. Our framework would lead to scenarios where a shock like Lehman’s bankruptcy simultaneously aﬀects both consumption and investment, leading to a deep and prolonged recession, even in the absence of any “true” productivity shock. Conversely, good news about the future (e.g. technology shocks) could help recovering faster from the low output trap. [1] John Maynard Keynes. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. Macmillan, London, 1936. [2] Alan Kirman. The Economic Crisis is a Crisis for Economic Theory. CESifo Economic Studies, 56(4):498–535, 2010. [3] Willem Buiter. The unfortunate uselessness of most ’state of the art’ academic monetary economics. VOX EU, June 2009. [4] Olivier Blanchard. On the future of macroeconomic models. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 34(1-2):43–54, January 2018. [5] Giovanni Dosi and Andrea Roventini. More is diﬀerent ... and complex! the case for agent-based macroeconomics. Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 29(1):1–37, March 2019. [6] A Korinek. Thoughts on DSGE macroeconomics: Matchnomic Theory and Public Policies: Joseph Stiglitz and the Teaching of Economics. Columbia University Press, 2017. [7] Paul Romer. The Trouble With Macroeconomics. 2016. [8] Joseph E Stiglitz. Where modern macroeconomics went wrong. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 34(1-2):70– 106, 2018. [9] Ray C Fair. Some important macro points. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 36(3):556–578, December 2020. [10] Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. On DSGE Models. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3):113–140, August 2018. [11] J. Lind´e, F. Smets, and R. Wouters. Challenges for Central Banks’ Macro Models. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 2, pages 2185–2262. Elsevier, 2016. [12] Greg Kaplan and Giovanni L. Violante. Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Shocks. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3):167–194, August 2018. [13] David Vines and Samuel Wills. The rebuilding macroeconomic theory project: An analytical assessment. Oxford It would also be interesting to look for a “grand uniﬁcation” between the type of behavioural business cycle/DSGE models considered in this paper and heterogeneous agent based models studied in the recent literature, which generically give rise to similar crises and bi-stable dynamics between high output and low output regimes of the economy (see e.g. [46, 47]). Acknowledgements We deeply thank Davide Luzzati who contributed to the early stages of this work, and Francesco Zamponi for many insightful discussions. This research was conducted within the Econophysics & Complex Systems Research Chair, under the aegis of the Fondation du Risque, the Fondation de l’Ecole polytechnique, the Ecole polytechnique and Capital Fund Management. Karl Naumann-Woleske also acknowledges the support from the New Approaches to Economic Challenges Unit at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Review of Economic Policy, 34(1-2):1–42, January 2018. [14] David Vines and Samuel Wills. The rebuilding macroeconomic theory project part II: Multiple equilibria, toy models, and policy models in a new macroeconomic paradigm. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 36(3):427– 497, December 2020. [15] Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. Monetary Policy According to HANK. American Economic Review, 108(3):697–743, March 2018. [16] Greg Kaplan and Giovanni L. Violante. A model of the consumption response to ﬁscal stimulus payments. Econometrica, 82(4):1199–1239, 2014. [17] Alisdair McKay and Ricardo Reis. The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle. Econometrica, 84(1):141–194, 2016. [18] Robert B Barsky and Eric R Sims. Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Innovations in Consumer Conﬁdence. American Economic Review, 102(4):1343– 1377, June 2012. [19] Olivier Blanchard. Where Danger Lurks. Finance and Development (IMF), 2014. [20] Hyman P. Minsky. John Maynard Keynes. Springer, 1976. [21] James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S. Macroeconomic Time Series. In John B Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors, Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1A, pages 3–64. Elsevier, New York, 1999. rency/Doubleday, New York, 2nd ed edition, 2005. [23] George A. Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller. Animal Spirits. Princeton University Press, 2010. [24] Cars Hommes. Behavioral and Experimental Macroeconomics and Policy Analysis: A Complex Systems Approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 59(1):149–219, March 2021. [25] Reiner Franke and Frank Westerhoﬀ. Taking Stock: A Rigorous Modelling of Animal Spirits in Macroeconomics. Journal of Economic Surveys, 31(5):1152–1182, 2017. [26] A Cornea, Cars H Hommes, and Domenico Massaro. Behavioral heterogeneity in U.S. inﬂation dynamics. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2):288–300, 2019. Unanchored, Heterogeneous Expectations and Liquidity Traps. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 101:1–16, April 2019. [28] Tolga Ozden. Heterogeneous Expectations and the Business Cycle at the Eﬀective Lower Bound. 2021. [29] Robert Calvert Jump and Paul Levine. Behavioural New Keynesian models. Journal of Macroeconomics, 59:59–77, March 2019. [30] Xavier Gabaix. A Behavioral New Keynesian Model. American Economic Review, 110(8):2271–2327, August 2020. [31] Pinar Deniz and Erhan Aslanoglu. Consumer Conﬁdence in a DSGE Model for Turkey. In Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, 2014. Allied Social Science Associations. [32] Jan-Niklas Brenneisen. Monetary policy under imperfect information and consumer conﬁdence. 2020. [33] Olivier Blanchard. Consumption and the Recession of 1990-1991. The American Economic Review, 83(2):270– 274, 1993. [34] Christopher D. Carroll, Jeﬀrey C. Fuhrer, and David W. Wilcox. Does Consumer Sentiment Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why? The American Economic Review, 84(5):1397–1408, 1994. [35] John Matsusaka and Argia Sbordone. Consumer Conﬁdence and Economic Fluctuations. Economic Inquiry, 33(2):296–318, 1995. [36] George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Har- 86(5):1689–1726, 2018. [37] George-Marios Angeletos and Jennifer La’O. Sentiments. Econometrica, 81(2):739–779, 2013. [38] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. Crises and Collective Socio- Economic Phenomena: Simple Models and Challenges. Journal of Statistical Physics, 151(3-4):567–606, 2013. [39] Joao Gama Batista, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Damien Challet. Sudden Trust Collapse in Networked Societies. Eur. Phys. J. B, 88(3), 2015. [40] Federico Morelli, Michael Benzaquen, Marco Tarzia, and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. Conﬁdence Collapse in a MultiHousehold, Self-Reﬂexive DSGE Model. PNAS, 2020. [41] Wendy Carlin and David Soskice. Stagnant productivity and low unemployment: Stuck in a Keynesian equilibrium. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 34(1-2):169– 194, January 2018. [42] Andrew W. Lo. Reading about the Financial Crisis: A Twenty-One-Book Review. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1):151–178, March 2012. [43] George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. Business-Cycle Anatomy. American Economic Review, 110(10):3030–3070, October 2020. [44] Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, and Henry M. Paulson Jr. Fireﬁghting: The Financial Crisis and Its Lessons. Penguin Books, New York, 2019. [45] Megan Greene. Joe Biden’s experiment could revolutionise economic thinking. Financial Times, May 2021. Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. Tipping points in macroeconomic agent-based models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 50(C):29–61, 2015. [47] Dhruv Sharma, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Stanislao Gualdi, Marco Tarzia, and Francesco Zamponi. V-, U-, L-, or W-shaped recovery after COVID? Insights from an Agent Based Model. PLoS One, 16(3), July 2020. [48] Robert J. Shiller. Narrative Economics. 2019. [49] Jordi Gal´ı. Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J, second edition, 2015. [50] Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters. Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A Bayesian DSGE approach. American economic review, 97(3):586–606, 2007. [51] Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. News-Driven Business Cycles: Insights and Challenges. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(4):993–1074, 2014. [52] Dimitri Kroujiline, Maxim Gusev, Dmitry Ushanov, Sergey V. Sharov, and Boris Govorkov. An endogenous mechanism of business cycles. Algorithmic Finance, pages 1–22, October 2019. [53] Paul Beaudry, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier. Putting the Cycle Back into Business Cycle Analysis. American Economic Review, 110(1):1–47, January 2020. [54] William F. Sharpe. Mutual Fund Performance. The Journal of Business, 39(1):119–138, 1966. [55] Zhi Da, Xing Huang, and Lawrence J. Jin. Extrapolative beliefs in the cross-section: What can we learn from the crowds? Journal of Financial Economics, 140(1):175– 196, April 2021. [56] Theresa Kuchler and Basit Zafar. Personal Experiences and Expectations about Aggregate Outcomes. The Journal of Finance, 74(5):2491–2542, 2019. Additional Parameters ΞWeighted proportion of time when k< n ΞWeighted proportion of time when c< c TTimescale of allocation S TTimescale of TFP shock z TTimescale of capital k