(2020). All countries around the world were severely affected, especially t h e United States of America (USA), where the numbers of conﬁrmed cases and deaths increased rapidly from March 2020 to April 202 1 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020). It is essential for the government and health institution s to monitor COVID-19 and control the pandem ic by making practical and reasonable plans. main difﬁculty with the pandemic is th at the cumulative nu mber of diagnosed cases cannot represent the number of infections. Many countries have made efforts to i nvesti gate the prevalence of COVID-19 (Anand et al. 202 0; Stringhini et al. 2020; Pollán et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Havers et al. 2020; Rosenberg et al. 2020; Sood et al. 2020; Ward et al. 2021); however, many of th ese investigations (Stringhini et al. 2020; Xu et al. 202 0; Havers et al. 2020; Sood et al. 2020) only focused on one or several hotspot (s ) instead of the whole country. In addi tion, when investigating the prevalence nationwide, restricted by the costs, only a small part of the whole population can be i nvesti gated, especiall y when the country has a broad territory area. Therefore, it is important to d evelop some appropriate sampling strategies. The use of convenience samples (Stringhini et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Havers et al. 2020 ; Rosenberg et al. 2020; Kissler et al. 2020) is not proper because they are prone to the selection bias, and thus, problematic. Some COVID-19 broke out at the end of 2019 and was declared a global pandemic by WHO Since some people infected by SARS-CoV-2 are asymptomatic (Sakurai et al. 2020), on e other literature work (Leong et al. 2021; Parenteau et al. 2021; Knudsen et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2021; Sartorius et al. 2021) drew samples from some representative dat abases — for example, the medical insurance databases. This strategy can reduce th e cost of the survey, but the representativen ess of su ch samples depends on the representativeness of the database. Another popular sampling strategy u sed in the investigatio ns o f prevalence is the multi-stage strati ﬁed sampling, or some variants of i t. Some recent studies (Ji a et al. 2020; Pollán et al. 2020; Ward et al. 2021; Nagashima et al. 2021; Ssentongo et al. 2021; Hort on-French et al. 2021; Mul eng a et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) have used these kinds of sampling m et hods. Compared with the simple random sampling, the variance of th e estimator obtained by the stratiﬁed sampling is usually smaller. However, this metho d depends heavily on the construction of the strata in which th e inter-homogeneity is required, and sometimes a well-designed s tratiﬁed sampli ng strategy m ay lead to a very comp lex analysis p rocedure. about the true situation of infections, and, therefore, can help with the sampling survey to i mprove the efﬁciency. However, none of the above research utilised this priori information sufﬁciently. In this paper, we propose a new sampling strategy for estimating the total number o f infections nationwide. The main feature of this method is that it can ﬂexibly and efﬁciently utilise the information about the dist ributions of both population and diagnosed cases. Compared with the stratiﬁed multi-stage sampling, our method is more ﬂex ible to adapt to various complicated distributions of p opulation and cases. The implementatio n and the corresponding estimati ng m ethods of this s ampling strategy are also easier. There are two stages in the sampling strategy: ﬁrst, determining the sampling posi tions according to some probabil ity density, and then sampl ing from these positions . The main focus of this paper is o n the ﬁrst Intuitively, the distribution of the number of cumulative cases provides priori in formation stage, in whi ch the p robability density may be multi modal and complicated. In this situation, some well-known methods t o sample from a general probability density function, including the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, e.g. Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm (Hastings 1970), and the sampling/importance resampling (SIR) method (Rubin 1987), as well as its variants (Pérez et al. 2005; Ning and Tao 2018), may have a bad performance. The reason is that those methods can’t adapt to various kinds of sampling densities (the MCMC method is easy to get stuck at some peak of the density function when the sampling dens ity is multimodal, and the performance of the SIR depends heavily on the choice of the proposal distribution and the quality of the initial samples from the proposal dis tribution). To overcome these problems, Wang et al. (2015) proposed a new method, called the glo b al likelihood sampling (GLS), which is also used in the ﬁrst s tage of our proposed sampling strategy. As for the second stage, any advanced sampling st rategy can be used, but for simplicity, we only consider the simple random sampling met hod in this paper. propose the basic approach. The GLS algorithm is also described in this section. In Section 3, the optimal settings of our sampling strategy are derived. The comp lete sampling strategy and the corresponding estimating method are given in Section 4, as well as some suggestions for practical implementation. Some numerical simulations are conducted in Section 5, in order to ﬁnd the robust s etting of a parameter in our method, and to show the efﬁciency of our method. To further explain our method, a practical example is presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper. Some additional remarks, details and simulation s are provided in the supplementary material. The rest of this paper is organ ised as follows. In Section 2, we describe the problem and 2.1. Basic Ap proach prevalence over the region R. The total populat ion o f t h is region, the cumulat ive number of diagnosed cases, and the cumulative number of real infections are denoted by N respectively. The corresponding densit ies of population, cases and infections in R are f and f with i bei ng P, D and I. The information about the population, N diagnosed cases, N Nand f N. Therefore, for convenience, our goal is to est imate N is the integral of f a probability density function on R and (i.i.d.) samples from N. Hereafter, we call is unknown, we have t o estimate the values of f consists of two stages: ﬁrst, determining the sampl ing positions the samples, i.e., the people who will receive the tests , at each sampl ing position to estimate the values of f Suppose a pandemic is spreading over a region R ⊆ R, and we want to know its total , is hard to get, wh ich is just what we are interested in. Since the total prevalence is , estim ating the total prevalence is equival ent to estimating the tot al number of infections Denote Z:= {1,··· ,k} for any k ∈ Nwhere Nis the set of all positive integers. Since N sampling is ado pted in th e second stage. Other advanced sampling methods can also be used in the second stage, which is prob lem-dependent. position in the region R, and n pling position x are tested. For each i ∈ Z τ= 0 otherwise. Intuitively, one person ’s possib ility of infectio n i s associated with the infection status of others in that person’s household/neighbourhood/com munity. This correlation can be characterised by the local prevalence function compared to the popul at ion around the pos ition x. Hence, we can con sider, approximately, that τ,··· , tor of f with its variance being Hence, in order to get the estimations of f sizes at R such that When the position x ∈ R is selected in the ﬁrst stage, the sample size at x will be mately. Hereafter, we call of the two stages, we obtain an unbiased estimat or of the total number of infections N Denote the local prevalence function over R byρ:= f/ f. Let x be an arbitrary ﬁxed τ∼ Bi(1,ρ(x)), where Bi represents the binomial distribution. An unbiased estima(x) is ξ,··· ,ξ. Suppose the expected total sample size is n, andνis a positive function on By th e central limit th eorem, where ‘ bution. Based on (7), we can construct the approximate conﬁdence in terval s for N large enough. It is hinted by the Supplementary M at erial that the least r required for well approximating this asymptotic distribution can be very small, which is completely achievable in practice. 2.2. Global Likelihood Sampling bility density function extraction of be not suitable. Instead, we adopt the GLS algorithm, whi ch applies to the multimo dal and complicated cases, to generate the r sampling positions. Detai led discussion can refer to Z hou et al. (2021). Algorithm 1 d escrib es the GLS method for generating i.i.d. samples The GLS used here is simpliﬁed compared to the original one in Wang et al. (2015). uniformity of D, the better P →’ means the convergence in distribution, and N(0,1) is the standard normal distri- The sampling strategy introduced in Section 2.1 involves sam pling from a bi-variate proba- The performance of Algorithm 1 d epend s on the un iformity of D. Intuitively, the better the Algorithm 1: GLS algorithm empirical distribution of the region 3. Optimal Settings of the Parameters rameters: the sampli ng density of sampling positions r. From (5), (6) and (7), these three parameters do not affect th e unbiasedness of settings of these parameters, where ‘optimal’ means to minim ise the variance of Let the smallest rectangle containing R be¯R ⊆ R; without loss of generality, suppose ¯R = [0,1]. Input: the kernel of the sampling dens ity:ˇf; a uniform desig n on¯R: D =q: j ∈ Z. Step 1. Loop. Repeat Steps 2 to 4 for i = 1 , · · · ,r. Step 2. Random shift. Generateδ∼ U(¯R) and let D=q⊕δ: j ∈ Z = D ⊕δ, where the operator ⊕ means the addition modulo 1, i.e. adding ﬁrst and then taking the fractional part for each component. Step 3. Likelihood. For each x ∈ D, let w(x) =ˇf(x)/∑ˇf(y), whereˇf(x) = 0 for x ∈¯R \ R. Then P=(x, w(x)) : x ∈ Dis a multinomial distribution on D. Step 4. Sampling. Generateξin Dfrom the multinomial distribution P. Output: r i.i.d. samples fromϕ:ξ,··· ,ξ. In the two-stage sampling strategy introduced in Section 2.1, th ere are three adjustable pa- First, we considerν, since it only affects the term v(ˆN) in (6). By the Lagrange multiplier method, we can ﬁnd that under the constraint (3), v where of the settings of when those optimal settings depend on f Instead, we need to ﬁnd the n early optimal settings o f mechanism to determine an initial rough estimate of f information about f [0,1] su ch that f information is given. A simple but reasonable way is to choose a proper constant take as an initial rough estimate of f which can make our method efﬁcient. With the estimator remains an integral is appropriate to approximate this integral using the Monte Carlo meth od. In fact, since the r positions ˜f :=pf( f− f). The minimum of v(ˆN)/r is˜f (x) dx/n, which is independent ϕ∝ fandνis set as (8), Var(ˆN) is minim ised with the minim um being However, the above optimal settings ofϕandνcannot b e achieved in p ractice because ˇγ· N+ (1 −ˇγ) · N]. As forν, we can useˇ˜f :=ˇf( f−ˇf) to estimate˜f in (8), but there ξ,··· ,ξare i.i.d. samples fromϕ, the sample mean is an unbiased estimator of the integral sample size at the sampling position This allocation method of sample sizes has the beneﬁt that the tot al sample size is exactly n, which meets the requirement in most practical s ituations. proportional to 1/r, thus v r can reduce Var( variance when the value of f distribution of r can n otably reduce the variance and improve the coverage rate of the conﬁdence interval. Note that in practice, l arger r may also increase th e cost and t he difﬁculty of the sampling survey, si nce more pos itions have to be sampled. T hese resul ts are consistent with the classical sampling theory (Cochran 19 77). be q u antiﬁed b y a cost function c over R. Then our goal is t o ﬁnd the appropriat e parameters which can minimis e both of Var( Var( Next, we consider t he number of sampling positions r. From (3) and (8),νis approximately In additio n, t h e costs at different sampling positions may be different in practice, which can ˆN) and the total cost can be used as an opti mality criterion, i.e., Var(ˆN) + cases, an analysis similar to the above can be performed, but it may be difﬁcult to derive the explicit expressions. Instead, the nu merical optimisation algorithms can be considered to solve this problem, which is beyond t he scope of thi s paper. 4. Sampling and Estimating we show the complete sampling strategy and the estimating m et hod in this section. Some suggestions for the practical implementati on are also given. the basic approach in Section 2.1 with the GLS al gorithm in Section 2.2. Algorithm 2: Two-stage sampling strategy c(x)ν(x)ϕ(x)dx whereγ∈ [0,+∞) reﬂect s the importance of the total cost. For such Based on the discussion about the nearly optimal settings of the parameters in Section 3, The details of the two-stage sampling strategy are described in Algorithm 2, which combines Input: a proper constant in [0, 1] to give a rough estimator of f:ˇγ; the uniform d esign used in Algorithm 1: D; the total sample size: n; the number of sampling po sitions: r. Step 1. Rough estimate. Obtainˇf, an initial rough estimator of f, by (10). The kernel of the sampling densityϕis set to beˇf. Step 2. Sampling positions. Generate r i.i.d. sampling positionsξ,··· ,ξin R from the sampling densityϕby the GLS in Algorith m 1. Step 3. Allocation of sample sizes. For each i ∈ Z, calcul ate round(n), the sample size at the sampling positionξ, where nis calculated by (11) and ‘roun d’ i s the function rounding a real number into the nearest integer. Step 4. Test. For each i ∈ Z, select rou nd(n) people at positionξby the simple random sampling and then implement tests on t hem. 1. About n. In practice, t h e n is u sually determi ned by both the requirement of precision and Next, we give some remarks about Algorithm 2 as follows. the restriction of cost s, thus Var(ˆN) should be roughly estimated before the implementation of the sampling strategy. Thi s can be d one by using (9), which can be approximated where m(R) is the area of R. The n s h ould be set such that the above estimator of Var(ˆN) is smaller than some pre-deﬁned threshold about the precision. cost will not exceed the budget, and no nis too small to esti mate f(ξ). An additional way to avoid small nis to modify the calculation method of the sample sizes at th ose sampling positions, i.e., the nin Step 3 of Algorithm 2 as whereη∈ [0,1] is a properly chosen const ant. Since the allocation metho d of sample sizes in (11) is nearly opt imal,ηin (12) should not be too large. The proper setting of ηshould make the minimum sample size among those sampling positions just achieve some pre-deﬁned threshold. Further, if nis not very small compared to the population around the sampling positionξ, ﬁnite population corrections (Cochran 1977; Lohr 2019) should be applied. For such case, expression (2) becomes 3. About the sampling survey at each sam pling position. For each i ∈ Z will give s ome recommendations in Section 5.1. testing results obtain ed by the above sampling strategy, we can esti mate N The variance of the estimator can also be estimated by (6), and then an approx imate conﬁdence interval (CI) can be constructed according to (7). This estimating procedure is discribed in detail as follows. position whereρ(x) refers to the sampling fraction at x ∈ R, and v(ˆN) in (6) becomes nsamples come from not exactlyξ, but a neighbourhood o fξ. For convenience, this neighbourhood can be chosen as some small district, l ike a city, village, or community, containingξor just close toξ. It won’t affect the property of this sampling strategy as long as the diameter of the neighbourhood is negligible compared to the whole region R. For example, the samples at eachξcan be drawn from the people whose current residences are within the circle centred atξwith radius 10km. Some other popul ar sampling methods, such as the stratiﬁed sampling, cl uster sampling, mul ti-stage sampling and other techniqu es (Lo hr 2019), can be used to estimate f(ξ) more efﬁcient ly. The corresponding results can be obtained similarly with suitable mod iﬁcations. In addition, it is difﬁcult to theoretically optimise the settin g ofˇγ, but the numerical studies Our main purpose is to estimate the cumu lative total number of infections N. With the Step 1. For i = 1,··· ,r, calculateˆf(ξ) by (1) using the testing results at t he sampling Step 2. Obtai n the p oint estimatorˆNof the total number of infections Naccording to (4). then ˆv( the est imator of N marised in Figure 1. In the next two sections, we wil l show some numerical simulations and a practical example to verify the validity of our proposed sampling strategy. Determine the region R in which th e prevalence is of i nterest Learn about the true dens ities of population and diagnosed cases in R Implement Algorithm 2 to obtain the sampling positions, the sample sizes at all sampling positions and the infection status of the samples Estimate the number of infections, or prevalence, fo llowing the four steps described at the end of Section 4 Figure 1. The complete procedure for implementing the proposed sampling meth od. ˆN) is an estimator of Var(ˆN). Step 4. According to (7), an approxi mate 1 −αCI of NisˆN− zˆv(ˆN), Hence, by the two-stage sampling strategy and the estimating method above, we can obtain 5. Numerical Simulation strategy, except for the coefﬁcient ˇγin the minimax sense through some numerical simulations, when there is little information about the underlying true f popular met hods to verify the efﬁciency of our method. 5.1. Robust Setting of be achieved, the variance of when we do not know the true f sample sizes and the sampling d ensity, the variance of on the quality of different settings of Our goal is to ﬁnd the set ting of minimised at that sized sub-squares. Let th e populations in t h em be 20, 40, 60 and 80, multiplied by 1 × 10 spectively, and the numbers of cases in them b e 6, 8, 4 and 2, multiplied by 1×10 Dividing those numbers by 1/4 will obtain the corresponding dens ities in the sub-squares. Fol- In Section 3 and Section 4, w e dis cussed how to s et the parameters in the two-stage sampling In the oracle situation, when t h e exact opt imal settings ofνandϕdiscussed in Section 3 can In the simulations, the region R = [0,1]is the unit square and it is divided into four equallowing i s the correspon ding graph. The total populat ion N size o f the uniform design us ed in the GLS algorithm M = 210, the total sample size n = 1 ×10 and the number of sampling positions r = 50. In different groups of simulations, the settings of fwill be different. For each setting of f a convex combination of f Series E contains three groups o f simulation s, E1 to E3, whose setting s are shown in Table 1, and th e corresponding results are given in Figure 2. For each setting of f the coefﬁcient a black curve in Figu re 2(a). The robust setting of SSD among the 19 settings of f which is marked out by a red circle. The other two subﬁgures are obtained similarly. The three subﬁgures in Figure 2 present a similar phenomenon t hat in t he domain of is large when when range of the true value of In this series, the true density of the infections is more comp lex than that in Series E. For each i ∈ Z over 200 independent simulations. In the ﬁrst series of simulation s, Series E, assume the true density of the infections fis ˇγis n either too large nor too small. Therefore, Figure 2 indicates that when a possible In order t o verify this conclusion, another series of simulations, Series R, is conducted. γ∈ [0,1], and f respectively. Series R also contains three groups of simulations, R1 to R3. The settings are shown in Table 2, in which there are 20 independent settings for the corresponding results are given in Figure 3. For example, in Group R1, each settin g of f is obtained by generating values in {0.05, 0.1 , 0 .15,··· ,0.9,0.95} one by one, and the correspondin g values of SSD( are calculat ed, and they form a black curve in Figure 3(a). The robu st setting of minimises the maximum SSD , i. e., the on e that minimises the red bold curve in Figure 3(a), which is marked out by a red circle. The three subﬁgures in Figure 3 s eem more tang lesome than those in Figure 2, which is caused by the complex setting of f phenomenon presented in Figure 3 is similar to that in Figure 2, i.e., in each subﬁgure, the red Figure 2. Results of the simulation s in Series E: curves of SSD againstˇγ. bold curve becomes high wh en ˇγis around the mid-point of that domain. It indicates again t hat the mid-point of the possibl e range of also present the simi lar phenomenon clearly. Th erefore, according to the above simulations under different settings o f ˇγaround the mi d-point of that range, which is robust in the sense that t he maximum value of SSD over all possible settings of f 5.2. Comparisons including the SIR, MH and the stratiﬁed sampling . In this simulation, the region R = [0 , 1] Figure 3. Results of the simulations in Series R: curves of SSD againstˇγ. γ’s is a robust setting ofˇγ. Some additi onal simu lations in the Supplementary Material In this subsection, we show some comparisons for the GLS against other popular methods, is divided into 16 equ al-s ized sub-s quares (which is similar to the previous subsection ) within each of which the d ensity of the population is uniform, w hile the densities of the cases and infections are proport ional to a normal distribution. In each of the 16 sub-squares, the population is ﬁxed, but the numbers of cases and infections are generated randomly. Please refer to the Supplementary Material for more details abo ut the sett ings. As for the sampling methods, we use the same sampli ng strategy in Algorithm 2, except for the sampler in Step 2. In our proposed meth od, the si ze of the uniform design used in the GLS M = 210. The proposal distributions in the SIR and MH samplers are set as the uniform distribution on R = [0,1] normal distribution with covariance matrix equal to 1/16 · I GLS, SIR and MH, the num ber of sampling positions r = 16, and the value of is used to determine th e sample s izes in each stratum. The total popul ation N and the total sam ple size n = 1 × 10 2. Standardised standard deviation: the ratio of the standard deviation of the estimator of N 3. Coverage rate of CI: the coverage rate of the approximate 95% CI. We us e 100 different random settings of f method, the values of these three criteria are calculated through 200 independent si mulations. The results are presented in Figure 4. The unb iasedness of the estimat ors of N . In the stratiﬁed sampling, the strata are the 16 sub-squares and the Neyman allocation We use the following three criteria to compare their p erformances: obtained by a particular method, to that obtained by our method with the exact optimal settings, which is similar to that in Section 5.1; four meth ods is veriﬁed through Figure 4(a). From Fig ure 4(b), we can ﬁnd that our method has the smallest SSD, i.e., the minimum variance of the estimator of N that the performance of the SIR samp ler depends heavily on the quali ty of the initi al samples from the proposal distribution, that the MH sampler is easy to get stuck at some peak of the density function, and that the stratiﬁed sampling method does not utilise the information about the population and the cases sufﬁciently. From Figure 4(c), we can also ﬁnd that our method has t h e highest coverage rate of the approximate 95% CI of N our method is efﬁcient, in the sense th at it s estimator of N and a high coverage rate of t he CI. COVID-19 in the USA is presented in this section. The ‘USA’ mentioned in this section refers to the 5 0 states of the USA, as w el l as the District of Columb ia, excluding other territories of the USA. The cumulative numbers of diagnosed cases of the 51 administrative districts in the USA can be obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Assu me To further illust rate the two-stage sampling strategy, an example based on the situ ation of that the true d ensities o f population f cases up to December 27th, 2020, and cases up to April 22nd, 2021 in the USA, respectively. The corresponding densities are depicted in Figure 5(a)–(c), with the unit being km speciﬁc data are shown in the Supplementary Material. The total population and the numbers of cases and infections are N respectively. The total sample size n is set as 10000, which is quite small compared to the total population of the USA. For compariso n, we use both ou r meth od and the classical stratiﬁed sampling to estim ate the total number of infections N reasonable to assume that the values of the true to obtain the ini tial rough estimation of f as recommended in the previous sections, and t he settings of th e sampling density allocation method of the sample sizes are nearly optimal. As for the stratiﬁed sampl ing, the strata are deﬁned as the 51 adm inistrative districts, which is consi stent with the area partit ion when recoding the epidemi c-related data; the Neyman allocation (Lohr 2 019) was used. The details abou t the stratiﬁed sampling are described in the Suppl ementary Material. standard deviation of the estim ator obtained by our proposed method is slightly smaller t han that of the stratiﬁed sampling, our method has higher coverage rate of CI. Note that in practice, the sam ples must be drawn from several selected sampling posi tions in each stratum. Due to this, the stratiﬁed multi-stage sampling is often used (Pollán et al. 2020), which can further increase the variance of the estimator. For the stratiﬁed multi-stage sam pling method, big efforts have to be made in order to adapt to a compl icated distribution of population, and the variance may become difﬁcult to estimate. However, our met hod can automati cally utilise the compli- The results of 200 rounds of independent simulations are shown in Table 3. Though the Figure 5. (a)–(c): The densities of popu lation, cases and infections; (d): the result of one round of simu lation. cated information about the distributions of population and cases, while also maintaining the simplicity i n estimating N In this round of simulati on, the esti mated n umber of infections Further, we show the result of on e of the 200 rounds of simulations to explain our method. estimated standard deviation true N f, and the circles represent the sampling po sitions, wi th their colours showing the estimated values of f size in this round is 9999 , smaller by 1 than the expected n = 10000, due to the round-off error at each sampli ng positi on. The sample sizes at these sampling positions are nearly the same, which is determined by the characters of f 7. Conclusions infections of a pandemic. Our method can sufﬁciently utilise the information about the dis tributions of both the p opulation and the diagnosed cases, which can gather i nformation more ﬂexibly than the existing methods, and hence, more efﬁcient. Moreover, our two-stage sam pling strategy does not involve any discrete structures like strata or clusters, therefore, it can easily and automatically adapt to the complicated distributions of population and cases, and t he corresponding estimating metho d keeps simple. The GLS algorithm used in our method is also easy to implement, since it does not need a proposal distribution. Its performance is robust against the complexity and multimod ality of the sampling density, which overcomes the drawbacks o f Table 3. Results of the comparison between our method and the stratiﬁed sampling. . The sampling positions are presented in Figure 5(d), where the background is the true In this paper, we propose a novel, two-stage sampling strategy to estimate the num ber of the other popular samplers for general probabil ity densities, such as the SIR or MH algorithm. settings of the s ampling d ensity and the allocation function in this sampling strategy is unrealistic. Instead, we discuss the nearly optimal ones for practical implem entation, whi ch is based on an initial rough estimate of the density of infections. The total sample size can be determined by the pre-deﬁned estimation precision. The small sample sizes at the sampling positions can be avoided by modifying the allocation o f sample s izes based on a convex combination. In addition, in the second stage of our method, we jus t consider the simple random sampling method for simplicity. To further improve the efﬁciency and eliminate the selection bias, other sampling methods like the st ratiﬁed sampling can be t aken into account, with some slight modiﬁcations for the corresponding formulae in the second stage. Further, by t he numerical simulations, we discuss the robust setting of t h e combination coefﬁcient for the rough estimator of the density of infections i n the minimax sense. We also compare the GL S algorithm with the SIR, MH and stratiﬁed sampl ing methods in terms of the relative bias, standard deviation and coverage rate of CI. It shows that the G L S algorithm has the smallest standard deviation and the highest coverage rate of t he approximate 95% CI. Moreover, we apply our method to the investigation of COVID-19 in the USA. Our method shows good performance and has higher coverage rate of CI compared with the stratiﬁed sampling. Hence, these simulations and the practical example verify the efﬁciency of our proposed two-stage sampling m ethod, whatever the sampling density is. Since the true density of the infections is not known in practice, obtaining the exact optimal Acknowledgments Nos. 11871288, 11771220 and 12131001; and Nat ural Science Foundation of Tianjin under 19JCZDJC31100. The ﬁrst two autho rs contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China un d er Grant