Florian Poydenot, Ismael Abdourahamane, Elsa Caplain, Samuel Der, Antoine Jallon, In´es Khoutami, Amir Loucif, Emil Marinov, and Bruno Andreotti 19 pandemic has motivated the following question: how can we use experimental physics projects to design rational methods to reduce the viral transmission risk indoors and keep this teaching going on during lockdowns? A group of students studying experimental physics at our university have therefore worked on the risk of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2, seen through complementary aspects: the dispersion of viral particles indoors and outdoors, reported here, the ﬁltration eﬃciency of face masks, the calibration of CO candles in a closed transparent box, the analysis of epidemic data, etc. This project has required a detailed understanding of both diﬀusion processes and turbulent ﬂows. at undergraduate level through hydrostatics, potential laminar ﬂows and viscous ﬂows. The concept of turbulence appears when teaching the drag force exerted on a moving spherical solid, as a function of the Reynolds number (see section II A). In this approach, one of the fundamental aspect of turbulence, namely space and time ﬂuctuations, is bypassed. Here we show that the dispersion of a passive scalar by a ﬂow provides an accessible way of teaching turbulence, theoretically as well as through very simple experiments. In section III, we make use of controlled experiments performed both in a small wind tunnel used for pedagogical purposes, using a smoke of oil droplets, and in the large corridors of two shopping malls, under various ventilation conditions, using CO faster than expected by the turbulent dispersion theory of Taylor, Indeed, introducing a single velocity decorrelation time provides a perfect ﬁt to the data, suggesting that the cascade is bypassed. The work presented here can be used to introduce students to the turbulent dispersion not only of pollutant molecules, but also of aerosols. We ﬁnally discuss the relevance of the results to the airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2, which has motivated this research. SARS-CoV-2 is mainly transmitted through the airborne route: a susceptible person inhales viral particles emitted by another infected person. In between their respective respiratory tracts, the air carrying viral particles is gradually diluted by turbulent dispersion. Near an emitter, the concentration of viral particles is therefore higher than far away, which has implications on the airborne transmission risk. The impossibility of turning experimental physics courses online during the COVID- However, turbulence is not an easy physics to teach. Fluid mechanics is mainly taught turbulence and in particular the concept of hydrodynamic regimes. Consider a solid particle of diameter d moving at a constant velocity v with respect to a ﬂuid at rest, of density ρ and viscosity η. These four parameters can be used to deﬁne characteristic scales of mass, length and time, leaving one dimensionless number controlling the ﬂow around the particle: the particle-based Reynolds number R, which compares inertial to viscous eﬀects where ν = η/ρ on the particle, which results from the distributed viscous stress, can be estimated from dimensional analysis. The velocity gradient scales as v/d. The force exerted by the ﬂuid on the particle can then be written simply as the viscous stress ∼ ηv/d times the surface ∼ d i.e. In these dimensional equations, the symbol ∼ is used to claim that the equation is valid up to a multiplicative factor which does not depend on any parameter. For a rigid sphere, each surface element contributes equally to the resultant of hydrodynamic forces. The area of the sphere is equal to π d the drag force, called Stokes force in this limit, reads In the frame of reference of the solid, the ﬂuid is moving at a velocity −v. In the viscous regime, the kinetic energy per unit volume approaches the solid surface. pressure. By symmetry, the force f acting on a spherical particle is still colinear with the velocity v but no longer depends on viscosity. The main force comes from the pressure The drag force on a spherical particle is a simple way of introducing diﬀerent aspects of In the viscous regime, at low Reynolds number R, the drag force exerted by the ﬂuid At large Reynolds number R, viscous tangential stress becomes negligible in front of asymmetry between both sides of the particle. Indeed, when streamlines converge (upstream of the particle, in its frame of reference), turbulent ﬂuctuations are damped while they are ampliﬁed when streamlines diverge (downstream of the particle). Kinetic energy far upstream of the particle is converted to pressure (internal energy) at the surface. The conservation of energy, called the Bernoulli equation, would lead to an overpressure equal boundary layer separates and forms a strongly dissipative recirculation bubble behind the particle. In the wake, turbulent ﬂuctuations lead to an enhanced energy dissipation: kinetic energy is not converted into pressure. The pressure on the downstream face of the particle is roughly the pressure far from the particle. The total force is the product of the pressure by the surface The multiplicative factor C object. For smooth spheres, at high Reynolds numbers, the experimental value of C around 0.47. When particles are entrained by a turbulent ﬂow, the same formulas remain valid, if the grain velocity v is replaced by the relative velocity v − u between the particle and the ﬂuid velocity u. However, the ﬂuid ﬂow must present negligible intrinsic turbulent ﬂuctuations, in front of those induced by the presence of the particle. allows students to understand that a ﬂow at large Reynolds number R can either be laminar (without ﬂuctuations) or turbulent (presenting space and time ﬂuctuations). Conversely, at small Reynolds number R, the ﬂow is dominated by viscous diﬀusion of momentum and is therefore laminar. Moreover, turbulence leads to an increased dissipated power scaling as ∝ v to teach: when viscosity, which is the only source of dissipation, is negligible, the generic regime is not an ideal (laminar) ﬂow but turbulence, which leads to an enhanced dissipation. surrounding gas. Fluid and particles are then said to form an aerosol. The quantitative criteria to neglect the eﬀect of gravity and particle inertia in front of the drag force will be ρvat the surface of the particle. However, on the ﬂanks of the particle, the shear Regarding teaching, the description of the upstream/downstream asymmetry of the ﬂow , to be compared to ∝ vat small Reynolds number. This constitutes a key enigma In the following, we will assume that transported particles follow the motion of the derived in section II D. Using a continuum approach, particle velocities can be decomposed into an Eulerian velocity v, averaged over a mesoscopic scale, and a zero-averaged random ﬂuctuating velocity. This thermal microscopic velocity induces a diﬀusion of particles. If particles are initially densely concentrated near one point, they get spread out in the absence of any mean ﬂow. Microscopically, this results from collisions with the gas molecules. In the ”random walk” approximation, one can assume that the particles moves a distance l between collisions, separated by a time l/v, such that their direction of motion gets randomized after each collision. Although the distance l is actually distributed and the direction of scattering may be correlated with the direction of motion before collisions, the random walk is an eﬀective description of diﬀusion at times larger than the velocity decorrelation time. After N collisions, the mean distance travelled by the particle remains null but the mean squared distance is: The distance travelled typically increases as comparison, it increases linearly in time t for a ballistic trajectory. Using the central limit theorem, the (null) average and the standard deviation at hand, the probability distribution for where a particle is after a (large) time t reads: ﬂux j. The conservation equation reads: Transport by the the average ﬂow leads to a ﬂux equal to the concentration times velocity j = Cv. Consider now thermal diﬀusion induced by random microscopic velocity ﬂuctuations at v = 0. Would the concentration be homogeneous i.e. constant in space, the diﬀusive ﬂux would vanish. At leading order, random exchanges between neighboring layers of ﬂuid lead to a ﬂux proportional to the gradient of concentration, oriented from high to low concentration. The phenomenological relation is known as Fick’s law: and the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is assumed to be independent of C, which must be true in the dilute limit C → 0. In the continuum approximation, we introduce the concentration C of particles and its whose Green function, i.e. the exact solution for an initial condition where all the particles are concentrated at a single point reads: where m is the total mass of particles. Identifying the microscopic model with the continuum approach, we obtain the Einstein-Smoluchowski equation: turbulent dispersion, induced by random turbulent ﬂuctuations, is diﬀusive. Light enough particles move with the local velocity, which includes ﬂuctuations around the average, noted v. Their overall motion is a random walk induced by turbulent ﬂuctuations v to an averaged drift velocity v. This is called the Reynolds decomposition: precisely, v is deﬁned as the average of velocity over realizations of the same experiment with diﬀerent turbulent ﬂuctuations. The motion of particles is a Brownian-like motion at a scale larger than the Eulerian turbulence integral length L, above which velocities are uncorrelated. The typical ﬂuctuating velocity σ velocity σ cedure on the conservation equation governing the evolution of the concentration C(r, t). Introducing the ensemble average concentration C(r, t), the concentration is decomposed into C(r, t) = C(r, t) + C where v is the Reynolds averaged velocity vector, D introduced. For the reasons invoked for molecular diﬀusion, v gradient diﬀusion assumption: Plugging this relation into the continuity equation, we get the linear diﬀusion equation: It has been argued in a pioneering article by Taylorpublished one century ago that The relevant transport equation is obtained by performing a Reynolds averaging prowhere D concentration therefore obeys: where D = D correlation time T , the turbulent diﬀusion coeﬃcient D of T by the squared turbulent velocity σ average concentration C obeys a convection-diﬀusion equation which reduces in the steady state to: This equation has the same structure as the diﬀusion equation, except that time is replaced by the space coordinate x. In the regime described by Taylor, the turbulent diﬀusion coefﬁcient D does not depend on r, the equation admits an exact solution: where the multiplicative factor is obtained by identifying the mass ﬂow rate across any section to the source injection rate ˙m. The dispersion radius σ This equation can also be seen as the dispersion in time of particles injected at a point source at initial time, the Gaussian concentration proﬁle resulting then from the central limit theorem. kinetic energy playing the role of temperature. However in the turbulent regime the velocity of a ﬂuid particle, followed along its Lagrangian path, remains correlated at short times. to an anomalous diﬀusion at short distances. On a phenomenological ground, the simplest hypothesis would be to assume that the velocity ﬂuctuation is a low pass ﬁltered noise associated with a typical relaxation time T . For a Langevin equation driven by a white noise, with a linear friction term, the correlation function decays exponentially: For an average ﬂow along the x direction and neglecting the longitudinal diﬀusion, the Taylor’s picture of turbulent diﬀusion is analogous to molecular diﬀusion, the turbulent The correlation time T is called the Lagrangian integral time scale, deﬁned in the general case as: The dispersion of ﬂuid particles injected at a source point at time t = 0 is given by Taylor’s theorem: Applied to equation (18) at time t = x/v, it gives: At large distance, one recovers a diﬀusive regime: The concentration along the axis (r = 0) is therefore expected to decay as 1/x. Conversely, at short distance, the formula predicts a ballistic-like regime of the form: which corresponds to a faster decay of the concentration along the axis (r = 0) as 1/x motion of a single particle reads where u = u + u particle response time to a change in the ﬂuid velocity given by the Stokes force (3). In the absence of turbulence, particles fall with a velocity If the ﬂuid presents a constant mean velocity, particles move on the average at a velocity v = u + v exponentially over a time T : Unlike passive scalars, particles are subjected to gravity and inertia. The equation of The aerosol phase forms when turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations are large enough to counteract particle settling, and using the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function, we ﬁnd: Inertia acts as a low-pass ﬁlter of the ﬂuid velocity. is called the Stokes number and characterizes the relative inﬂuence of particle inertia and hydrodynamic drag. If the Stokes number St is much smaller than 1, particles presents a negligible inertia and the particle velocity correlation function reduces to the ﬂuid velocity correlation function v Stokes number St is much larger than 1, the correlation function decays exponentially as tunnel used for experimental physics student projects, schematized in Fig. 1. A turbulence generating grid (3 × 3 grid of 7 × 7 cm squares separated by 1 cm wide bars) is inserted St exp (−τ/τ). The dispersion of a smoke composed of micron-sized oil droplets is studied in a small wind immediately after the inlet contraction section. The ﬂow Reynolds number is between 10 and 10 diﬀuser. Oil vapor is injected at a controlled rate through a 6 mm nozzle heated by a resistor at a controlled power. A smoke of droplets nucleates at few millimeters downstream. The smoke is made dilute enough so that the light intensity scattered is directly proportional to the local drop concentration. We quantitatively check the dilution by putting the light behind the tunnel rather than above. High resolution pictures with a 1 or 2 s exposure time are taken with a Digital Single-Lens Reﬂex camera. In order to keep the image data linear with respect to the light intensity, the raw images ﬁles are debayered using a bilinear approximation and no further image processing is performed. A series of 10 pictures in the same conditions is averaged to achieve a satisfying statistical convergence; the mean green channel is used to measure the light intensity. The image of the tunnel without smoke is subtracted to remove residual background light. The light intensity proﬁle I calibrated using a diﬀusive object. It is ﬂat along the tunnel axis, except at the start and the end of the tunnel where it falls oﬀ due to greater distance to the illumination source. The intensity I(x, y) of a particular pixel is an integral over the z axis of the scattered intensity. The concentration proﬁle is expected to depend on the distance to the central axis in a Gaussian way: ∼ exp (−((y − y image intensity ﬁeld I(x, y) remains Gaussian along y: We therefore ﬁt each transverse pixel line over [y proﬁle to extract C(x), which is proportional to the concentration on the axis, and the radius are shown in Fig. 3. As the droplets are formed by vaporizing oil, the smoke is hot and slightly buoyant so the centerline y mean particle velocity ratio is at most 10 as being along the tunnel axis. The proﬁles are nicely ﬁtted by a Gaussian, which leads to . The 120 ×23 ×23 cm test section is illuminated from above by a LED array with a Transverse intensity proﬁles at a regularly spaced distance from the smoke injection nozzle the measurement of the two parameters of Eq. (28), the concentration on the axis, C and the radius σ to the rate of emission by the source. Fig. 2 shows typical proﬁles C(x)σ indeed ﬂat outside of the injection zone. It means that the droplets, once nucleated, do not change much and keep the same light scattering properties; this validates the use of this measurement technique. is signiﬁcantly larger with a grid generating turbulence than without. In all cases, Eq. (21) provides an excellent ﬁt to the data, within error bars. It constitutes a very striking result: a model based on a single correlation timescale is suﬃcient to represent adequately the data. At short distance x < ¯vT from the source, the dispersion takes place in a cone: σ in x. This controversial regime has been explored in a series of recent papers. Fig. 4 shows various proﬁles of the dispersion radius σ(x). The dispersion of aerosols distance x > ¯vT , conversely, the constant diﬀusion regime predicted by Taylor is recovered. From each proﬁle σ(x), two quantities are therefore extracted: the turbulent ﬂuctuation rate σ and diﬀusive regimes. These quantities are plotted in Fig. 4 as a function of the mean ﬂow velocity v. The ﬂuctuation rate σ equal to ∼ 7.5%. The cross-over length vT is very small when no grid is introduced at the entrance of the wind tunnel. It is much larger with a turbulence generating grid. It tends to a constant as u → 0 and increases with the ﬂuid velocity u. The Lagrangian correlation length σ signiﬁcantly smaller than the grid mesh size. The slope of the curve gives a characteristic time around 9 ms, which is much larger than the Stokes time of oil droplets. To the best of our knowledge, there is no simple mechanistic explanation to the observed behaviour. CoV-2 in public spaces, we have performed ”ﬁeld” experiments in the large corridors of two commercial malls and of our university. The experimental set-up is schematized in Fig. 6. A controlled CO in an open cylindrical container of diameter 20 cm heated by a power controlled hot plate. The source is positioned at a distance 1.1 m above the ground. The imposed sublimation rate, measured using a scale, is equal ˙m = 1.5 g/s. This order of magnitude is chosen to /v and the cross-over length vT , which is the cross-over distance between the ballistic T increases from 0.7 cm to 2.5 cm in the range of velocities explored, which is In order to test the relevance of the wind tunnel results for the transmission of SARSmeasure CO source used is about 150 times the CO change the dispersion rate. The experiment had been designed believing that the turbulent dispersion would be statistically isotropic, as expected for an eﬀective diﬀusion caused by large scale incoherent turbulent motion. sized glycerol+water droplets have shown that in most large public spaces, there are air drafts causing horizontal transport and biased dispersion. After identiﬁcation of the mean air ﬂow direction, non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) CO the source. They recorded the CO around 30 minutes. The initial and ﬁnal values of C are used to determine the background Our initial motivation was to characterize the dispersion of breath in public spaces. The level C. is established. CO draft wind velocity was measured using a hot-wire anemometer. It ranges from 0.1 to 2 m/s depending on the location. The ﬂow Reynolds number is between 10 small-scale wind tunnel. Measurements are done with diﬀerent ventilation ﬂow rates and recycled air fractions; the use of ﬁre safety ventilation, namely mechanical smoke extractors and smoke vents, has been tested when available. Measurements have been performed with entrance doors both open and closed, as open doors create large drafts in some locations. Control sensors (not shown in Fig. 6), placed immediately upstream, to the left and to the right of the source showed no concentration increase: convection dominates over turbulent diﬀusion. ﬂow is reasonably aligned with the sensor axis. Fig. 7 shows that C decays spatially very After an initial short transient time, a concentration ﬁeld in a statistically steady state Concentration proﬁles are averaged over the fraction of the time during which the air fast, typically as x where ρ is rescaled by ˙m/ρ between data shows that the CO v. The fraction of fresh air injected in the ventilation system had no eﬀect on the measured concentrations: in practice, only the local airﬂow disperses CO induced to renew air is negligible in front of natural air drafts. in the ballistic regime given by Eq. (23). We can parametrize the dilution by: where α is the dispersion cone slope, determined by the turbulent ﬂuctuation rate σ ﬁnd a = 0.35 m, which is close to the actual diameter of the dry ice container and α = 0.10. We have also included in Fig. 7 the CO through the mouth, in a fan-induced wind of velocity v = 0.3 m/s. We ﬁnd a ≈ 0.27 m and a slightly higher ﬂuctuation rate α = 0.14 in that case. mucus, ranging between 200 nm-200 µm, which can contain viral particles. These droplets are produced in the respiratory tract during normal respiratory activity by various ﬂuid instabilities. particles, which may start an infection when one of the virions is deposited on an ACE2 receptor of the epithelium and successfully bypasses the immune response. Infection may also start if virions deposit on the eyes. The probability of infection increases with the intake viral dose d, deﬁned as the amount of virus particles inhaled by a person, cumulated over time. It therefore increases with the exposure time and with the concentration of viral particles in the air. The decay of C − Cis consistent with the overall conical shape of the dispersion zone SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted in the airborne route by respiratory aerosols:droplets of the concentration in viral particles in the air inhaled by another susceptible person. This concentration is given by the rate of emission of viral particles in the air exhaled by an infected patient and by the dilution of the air between exhalation and inhalation. In closed rooms, viral particles accumulate and their concentration eventually reaches a steady state between exhalation and ventilation, which is the replacement of contaminated air by fresh air. This explains the large transmission clusters in poorly ventilated indoor spaces. The average transmission risk, uniform in space, can be determined by assuming that viral particles are well-mixed by turbulence. In that case, dilution is due to the natural or forced air exchanges with outside air. much higher and decays with distance, and the dilution from the exhalation concentration of viral particles to the average concentration of viral particles is controlled by the local airﬂow. The total transmission risk is therefore the sum of an average risk, controlled by ventilation, and a supplementary risk in the dispersion cone of exhalations. Outdoors, in the absence of homogenizing ﬂow, this short-range risk is the only transmission risk. Respiratory activity such as unmasked coughs and sneezes can create large airﬂows that dominate over the preexisting ﬂow patterns. In that case, air is exhaled in a buoyant jet that gets gradually mixed at its boundaries as it travels. and the cheeks if the mask is not properly ﬁtted. respiratory puﬀ was consistently found to be make the puﬀ stop earlier. Beyond this very near ﬁeld distance, the ambient airﬂow controls particle transport. The typical ﬂow scale is therefore the size of the head, which acts as an obstacle to the ﬂow: at a distance to the face comparable to it, the respiratory airﬂow has a negligible velocity, and dilution is fully controlled by the ambient airﬂow, which is what we have extensively developed here. there is a horizontal air draft, or the air velocity is much larger than the exhalation velocity. We have found that in large indoor corridors, the airﬂow is a horizontal draft with u = 0.1 −1 m/s. Outdoors, the wind is also horizontal with larger velocities. Understanding the dilution in these public spaces allows us to assess their transmission risk, given biological data on pathogen contagiousness. The risk of viral transmission by a given infected patient is therefore determined by Masks strongly alter the airﬂow by blocking the jet; small jets can remain along the nose Our analysis applies to any public space where either mask wearing is mandatory and on a solid physical basis, as some (such as the ”6 ft rule”) are not (see Refs. 26, 42 for a historical perspective and critical discussion). Exhaled CO in well-mixed rooms; risk into an equivalent long-range risk. For the gentle draft of shopping mall corridors u ' 0.2 m/s, the increase in risk at 6 ft corresponds to a CO 50 ppm. a passive scalar by a turbulent ﬂow. This constitute an accessible problem to teach turbulence at an undergraduate level, combining possible experiments and theory. Using any source of smoke, a fan and a camera, the Reynolds decomposition between average and ﬂuctuating quantities can be illustrated, qualitatively and quantitatively. The derivations, based on physical reasoning and dimensional analysis, remain linear and much simpler than attempting to solve the Navier-Stokes equation. While the Reynolds number dependence of the drag force exerted on a solid is useful to introduce dimensionless numbers, asymptotic regimes, viscosity and inertial eﬀects, the diﬀusion of a passive scalar provides a way to understand the role of ﬂuctuations to enhance turbulent mixing. The applications to the dispersion of odors and animal olfactory search, viral transmission are immediately appealing to students. diﬃcult to understand, and in particular the concept of turbulent energy cascade. Considering a spatial scale `, the total turbulent kinetic energy can be divided into a contribution due to ﬂuid motion at scales larger and smaller than `. This low pass and high ﬁltering generalizes the Reynolds decomposition, introducing the scale over which the average is performed. According to the energy cascade picture, the energy is injected into large scale motion and dissipated by viscosity at small scale. In between, it must be transferred from large scales to small scales by inertial eﬀects. The ﬂux of kinetic energy through a particular scale ` can be deﬁned as the transfer per unit time of kinetic energy associated to scales larger In this article, we have investigated experimentally and theoretically the dispersion of Diﬀerent concepts cannot be introduced through the dispersion of smoke, which are more than ` into kinetic energy associated to scales smaller than `, due to velocity ﬂuctuations of typical amplitude δv(`) at scale `. Using dimensional analysis, the energy ﬂux per unit mass across the scale ` should be proportional to δv which viscous dissipation is negligible, this energy ﬂux should be constant. One deduces the Kolmogorov scaling law: where L is the integral scale. An analogous of the cascade idea for a passive scalar has been introduced by Richardson, as `δv ∼ ` results reported here show that turbulence intermittency and coherent structures lead to a much simpler eﬀective picture, with a single decorrelation timescale, at least for this range of Reynolds numbers. velocity decorrelation in the inertial range of time-scales. Indeed, at very short time, the particle velocity can be expanded into u Therefore, at very short time-scales (say, smaller than the Kolmogorov time (L/u)R we get: where σ from 1 and not linearly as given by the exponential formula (26). This is exactly the behaviour reported both numerically and experimentally structure function. It is therefore not obvious that the ballistic-like regime observed here can be interpreted as the analogous of the Batchelor regime particles. and not for the inertial range of scales. reasoning. The problem of epidemic risk reduction is extremely diﬃcult as it is at the crossroads between many diﬀerent ﬁelds; it is not entirely scientiﬁc as it presents social, economic and political aspects. Yet physics must play a deﬁnite role, as it provides insights It is important to emphasize that the equation (26) describes phenomenologically the We believe that it is essential to teach experimental physics and its speciﬁc mode of and methods to solve a few particular problems, from the biophysics of the respiratory system to infection prevention strategies. physical sciences in particular, has been shown to be essential to design an appropriate public health policy. useful to provide rational public health policy recommendations to prevent transmission in local shopping malls on a mechanical basis. Namely: increasing turbulent dispersion or the distance between people to reduce the short-range transmission risk; increasing ventilation to reduce the long range transmission risk; performing experiments with smoke to directly test the airﬂows in public spaces; determining on a rational basis the limit CO compatible with a moderate airborne transmission risk. This study is based on a speciﬁc mode of reasoning, relying on experiments and measurements, rather than on theory; the mathematical tools used are simple enough to be accessible to undergraduate students. (only) technical tasks: assembling NDIR CO measurements. They have also analyzed the problem, read parts of the literature on SARSCoV-2, designed controlled experiments and provided practical answers. We believe that being able to read the scientiﬁc literature, to design experiments and to conduct a rigorous reasoning, is amongst the intellectual skills that the teaching of experimental physics should aim at, and not only illustrate theoretical courses with academic experiments. provided access to Forum des Halles and Carr´e S´enart as well as technical assistance. This article involves seven undergraduate students who have worked on the problem in the context of their ﬁnal-year experimental physics courses (”Phy Exp”) at the Universit´e de Paris. The authors thank the ”Phy Exp” team and in particular the lathe-mill operator, Wladimir Toutain, and the technician, Thibaut Fraval De Coatparquet, for their assistance. We thank Alessandra Lanotte and Luca Biferale for the fruitful discussions. The undergraduate students who have participated in this study have not performed Unibail-Rodamco-Westﬁeld has funded this work under the CNRS contract 217977 and Centres Commerciaux (CNCC), who asked the authors to make recommendations for a health protocol aiming to reduce and quantify the transmission risk in shopping centers. The conclusions of the present article are therefore of direct interest for the funding company. The authors declare no ﬁnancial competing interest. The funding company had no such involvement in study design, in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, nor in the writing of the article. The authors had the full responsibility in the decision to submit it for publication. This work was funded by Unibail-Rodamco-Westﬁeld on behalf of Conseil National des