We present the Strong Lensing Science Collaboration’s (SLSC) recommended observing targets for the science veriﬁcation and science validation phases of commissioning. Our recommendations have been developed in collaboration with the Dark Energy Science Collaboration (DESC) Strong Lensing Topical Team. In summary, our key recommendations are as follows: Collett, Frederic Courbin, Brenda Frye, Raphael Gavazzi, Cameron Lemon, Anupreeta More, Dan Ryczanowski, Sherry H. Suyu, on behalf of the Strong Lensing Science 1. Prioritize ﬁelds that span the full range of declination observable from Cerro Pach´on during the engineering focused Science Veriﬁcation phase of commissioning, before concentrating on equatorial ﬁelds for the Science Validation surveys. 2. Observe quadruply lensed quasars as the ultimate test of the Active Optics system towards the end of the Science Veriﬁcation phase of commissioning. These systems are the strongest tests known for delivered image quality (DIQ; Figure 1). 3. Prioritize candidate science validation survey ﬁelds (both single deep pointings and wide ﬁelds) that have been searched thoroughly by precursor surveys for strong lenses. 4. The optimal wide ('100 degree) science validation ﬁeld would include the CFHT-LS W4 ﬁeld, and overlap with the SDSS Stripe 82, DES-SN, KIDS and HSC-SSP ﬁelds. 5. The optimal single pointing science validation ﬁelds are the XMM-LSS and COSMOS Deep Drilling Fields, the equatorial Hubble Frontier Fields galaxy clusters, and strongly lensed quasars with measured time delays that are well-matched to commissioning timescales. This document is the Strong Lensing Science Collaboration’s (SLSC) “Commissioning Note”, and has been prepared in response to the Rubin Project’s call for community input to the on-sky observing strategy during commissioning Note span both the science veriﬁcation and science validation phases of commissioning. Our understanding is that the Rubin Project Team deﬁne the former as primarily an engineeringfocused phase in which opportunistic on-sky observations with ComCam and LSSTCam will be performed. We understand that science veriﬁcation will be followed by sustained on-sky observing which aims to achieve at least ten-year depth and to enable testing of transient detection via two complementary science validation surveys. breakthroughs in the next 10+ years. These breakthroughs are expected to span a diverse range of high impact topics including testing cold dark matter predictions on sub-galaxy scales, measurements of the Hubble parameter independent of the cosmic distance ladder based on time delay cosmography (e.g. Suyu et al. 2013), novel constraints on the dark energy equation of state parameter from multiple source-plane lenses (Jullo et al. 2010; Collett & Auger 2014), discovery of optical counterparts to gravitationally lensed gravitational waves (Smith et al. 2019), and a new window on high redshift galaxy evolution. number of known strong lenses across the dark matter halo mass function, from galaxy-scale lenses through to the most massive cluster-scale lenses. Rubin’s Wide Fast Deep survey therefore has the potential to revolutionize strong lensing science by expanding the number of lenses by three orders of magnitude from hundreds to hundreds of thousands. Realising this expansion relies in turn on the quality of the data products delivered by Rubin, both in low latency as “Prompt Products” (PP) and on longer timescales as “Data Release Products” (DRPs) and the template images used in diﬀerence image analysis (DIA). helping the Rubin Construction Project pass the Operations Readiness Review (ORR), and ensuring that Rubin data will enable strong lensing science promptly once survey operations commence. Each step will be critical, beginning with verifying the performance of the active optics system with quadruply lensed quasars, validating the quality of PPs, DRPs and template images during the science validation phase, and then running the lens discovery pipeline that we are developing jointly with DESC on the second data preview (DP2). Here we describe the selection of the ﬁelds themselves, and discuss them in relation to pre-ORR science validation and veriﬁcation tasks. Our early science plans for DP2 lie beyond the ORR and are therefore outside the scope of this Note. (Section 3), list the commissioning ﬁelds that we recommend in Table 1, and summarize our preferred science validation survey scenarios by quarter in Table 2. Strong gravitational lensing is broadly accepted as having huge potential for major scientiﬁc Our ability to achieve breakthrough strong lensing science is fundamentally limited by the In this Note we recommend commissioning ﬁelds that will enable a step-by-step approach to We organise our recommendations under science veriﬁcation (Section 2) and science validation Rubin’s delivered image quality (DIQ) is mission critical for many high proﬁle science goals across LSST Science Collaborations. It is therefore essential to evaluate and optimize Rubin’s DIQ prior to the beginning of science operations using well-deﬁned and challenging scientiﬁc “use cases”. Strongly lensed point sources (i.e. quasars and explosive transients) in early type galaxies are the strongest use cases that we have identiﬁed so far, driven by the challenges of source crowding and the resulting complex background. valuable resource from which to select science veriﬁcation targets. In particular, lensed quasars span a wide range of right ascension, and the brightness of the quasar images are typically wellmatched to Rubin’s single-visit depth. Importantly, lensed quasars have for many years been a classic ﬁller/snapshot target list from which an object can be selected quickly when engineering allows on-sky observations. range 0.6 − 1.5 arcseconds, and are thus resolvable in a range of observing conditions (Table 1). The targets span a range of right ascension and declination such that they span the full calendar year and both northern and southern skies as seen from Cerro Pach relatively low airmass for many hours each night; the most northerly system (SDSS J0924+0219) is observable for 2–5 hours per night at airmass<1.5 during November to May. Whilst all targets have been selected for their role in testing the DIQ in commissioning, SDSS J0924 is also ripe for large caustic crossing events for which a 600 ksec target of opportunity programme with Chandra has recently been awarded. This adds considerable scientiﬁc interest to these engineering-focused observations. to small variations in image quality. In Figure 1 we show images of the quadruply lensed quasar DES J0405−3308, taken with DECam on the Blanco telescope. Relatively small diﬀerences in the DIQ produce dramatic diﬀerences in its appearance. Visual inspection of the data at the telescope during science veriﬁcation observations will therefore give the commissioning team immediate valuable feedback on DIQ variations before the data are analyzed and quantitative measurements are made. at the center of the ﬁeld, and once at each the corner of the 3 degree ﬁeld, and once each at 3, 6, 9 and 12 o’clock. Repeat visits – returning to a quad quasar to repeat this series of ten observations – will also permit assessment of DIQ and feedback on the performance of the active optics system in diﬀerent seeing conditions and telescope state, and provide invaluable tests of the reproducibility of test results. demanding manner possible in the latter stages of science veriﬁcation. These tests are ideally accomplished through the observations of the targets described here, supported by an individual with strong lensing expertise embedded within Rubin’s SIT-Com team. This individual would interact closely and rapidly with hands-on commissioning colleagues. The core activity would be to analyze Rubin data and measure covariances between observed quantities that depend sensitively on The numerous strongly lensed quasars that have been discovered to date therefore provide a We have selected eight quadruply lensed quasars that have multiple image separations in the We emphasize that the visual impression one gets of a lensed quasar is exquisitely sensitive We recommend that each lens is observed through a single ﬁlter, ten times during a visit: twice In summary, we recommend to test the DIQ performance of the Simonyi Telescope in the most image quality and system / atmospheric quantities including DIMM seeing, airmass, windshake, mirror temperature and residual wavefront error at varying distances from the ﬁeld center. During science validation it is essential to validate that the Rubin Observatory and her Science Pipelines are capable of delivering science-grade data on strong gravitational lenses. We stress that before the ORR, we are interested in validating the robustness of the pixel data and the catalogues derived from those pixels, and not on science. Robust validation tests require commissioning observations of ﬁelds that contain a large number of strong lenses that have been discovered and studied by precursor surveys. These considerations, and looking ahead to early science in DP2, both motivate prioritizing equatorial ﬁelds for science validation surveys. This is because observing to the North of Cerro Pach observatories that can conduct follow-up observations of new discoveries based on DP2. outlined above in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 respectively. In summary the wide ﬁelds prioritize equatorial CFHT-LS ﬁelds, and the single pointings include carefully selected galaxy- and cluster-scale lenses, in addition to the COSMOS and XMM-LSS Deep Drilling Fields. All recommended science validation ﬁelds are listed in Table 1, including the months of the year in which each ﬁeld is observable for ≥2 hours per night at airmass≤1.5. We also summarise our preferred science We recommend speciﬁc wide ﬁelds and single pointings that satisfy the over-arching criteria validation ﬁelds by quarter in Table 2. This table highlights that there is overlap in our preferred ﬁelds with those listed in Table 2 of the DESC Commissioning Note (Amon et al., 2020). We recommend that wide ﬁeld science validation surveys observe the equatorial ﬁelds from CFHT-LS, namely W1, W2, W4 (Table 1). These are the most thoroughly explored regions of the sky for strong lens discovery, both initially by colleagues using CFHT-LS data, and more recently by colleagues in surveys (KIDS, HSC-SSP) whose footprints expand on the original CFHTLS ﬁelds. In anticipation of ten-year depth observations being limited to ∼100−200 degree CFHT-LS ﬁelds oﬀer the perfect criterion on which to select a sub-region of these wider and newer surveys. Should time allow, we recommend to expand these CFHT-LS wide survey footprints in to the surrounding KIDS and HSC-SSP equatorial ﬁelds. validation because the DES image quality and depth is generally not as good as that of CFHT-LS and HSC-SSP. However, the CFHT-LS W4 ﬁeld discussed above overlaps with the SDSS Stripe 82, which is included within the DES footprint. Therefore if the observing season allows, a W4/S82-based science validation survey may be optimal (Table 2). Among the LSST Deep Drilling Fields, we strongly prefer XMM-LSS and COSMOS because they match the LSSTCam ﬁeld of view well, are equatorial, and have been searched previously for strong lenses. Also, the XMM-LSS ﬁeld is located within the CFHT-LS W1 ﬁeld discussed above. Equally, we strongly disfavor the ECDFS and ELAIS S1 as science validation ﬁelds because they don’t satisfy these criteria. put forward by DESC (Amon et al., 2020), and include them in our Table 1. We prefer clusters that are (1) known as strong lenses, (2) are well studied, (3) are at equatorial declinations, and (4) that have larger Einstein radii. Applying these criteria to the known cluster lenses, we obtain the clusters listed in Table 1. They span the full range of right ascension, and many of them are also listed by Amon et al. (2020). In a nuthsell, the optimal cluster-scale lens for science validation observations is one of the Hubble Frontier Fields, due to the wealth of superb data from precursor surveys. Among the Frontier Fields, Abell 370 is our highest priority due to it being equatorial. We thank our colleagues in the Strong Lensing Science Collaboration and Dark Energy Science Collaboration Strong Lensing Topical Team for their support and assistance during the preparation of this note. We thank Keith Bechtol in particular for his patient support, advice, and encouragement. GPS acknowledges support from The Royal Society, Leverhulme Trust, and the Science and Technology Facilities Council. We strongly disfavor observing a ∼100−200 degreeregion of the DES footprint during science Turning to pointed observations of known strong lenses, we agree with the galaxy-scale lenses