A cookie banner pops up when a user visits a website for the ﬁrst time, requesting consent to the use of cookies and other trackers for a variety of pur poses. Unlike prior work that has focused on evaluating the user interface (UI) design of cookie banners, this paper presents an in-depth analysis of what cookie banners say to users to get their consent. We took an interdisciplinary approach to determining what cookie banners should say. Following the legal requirements of the ePrivacy Directive (ePD) and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), we manually annotated around 400 cookie banners presented on the most p opular English-speaking websites visited b y users residing in the EU. We focused on analyzing the purposes of cookie banners and how these purposes were expressed (e.g., any misleading or vague language, any use of jargon). We fo und that 89% of cookie banners violated applicable laws. In particular, 61% of banners violated the purpose speciﬁcity requirement by mentioning vague pur poses, including “u ser experience enhancement”. Further, 30% of banners used positive framing, breaching the freely given and informed consent requirements. Based on these ﬁndings, we provide recommendations that regulators can ﬁ nd useful. We also describe future research directions. • Se curity and privacy → Human and societal aspects of security and privacy. Usable security and privacy; cookie banners; ePD; GDPR; transparency; consent; purpose speciﬁcatio n; framing ACM Reference Format: Cristiana Santos*, Arianna Rossi*, Lorena Sánchez C hamorro, Kerstin BongardBlanchy, and Ruba Abu-Salma. 2021. Cookie Banners, What’s the Purpose? Analyzing Cookie Banner Text Through a Legal Lens. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society (WPES ’21), November 15, 2021, Virtual Event, Republic of Korea. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3463676.3485611 When users residing in the EU browse the web, they encounter a large number of banners prompting t hem to “cli ck accept to consent to the use of cookies as described in our cookie policy”. These banners appear because, according to the ePrivacy Directive (ePD) [29] and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [35], website operators, regardless of where they are based, must inform users located in the EU of the collection of their personal data. User consent is needed only when co okies and similar tracking technologies are used for unnecessary purposes, such as advertising. Yet, website operators are required to be transparent and clearly explain the pur pose of the u se of cookies even if these cookies are necessary for the website to operate (i.e., necessary purp oses), such as authentication and security [54]. Without knowing the speciﬁc purpose(s) of the use of cookies, users cannot decide whether to consent to the collection of their personal data. While prior studies have evaluated the user interface (UI) design of c ookie banners to determine how design inﬂuences users’ consent decisions [9, 37, 38, 49, 71], little attention has been given to the textual elements of banners, which could likewise unlawfully steer users toward particular choices. There has been no in-depth analysis of what cookie banners say (and should say) and, hence, website owners can request user consent at their own discretion [7, 42]. They may employ technical jargon [67, 71], vague and ambiguous language, and positive or negative framing. The resulting lack of transparency undermines users’ ability to understand why their data is collected and what risks are involved (Recital 3 9 GDPR, [20, 50, 55]), hindering informed decisions and unlawfully nudging users toward giving their consent [12, 13, 19, 23, 34, 46]. As part of ongoing work aimed at promoting transparency, lawfulness, and user-friendliness of cookie banner UIs, this paper addresses the following: What are the purposes of cookie banners, and how are these purposes expressed? We combine expert ise in data protection law, human-computer interaction (HCI), linguistics, and computer science to evaluate whether cookie banner text complies with the ePD and GDPR legal requirements concerning purposes and consent. To this end, we collecte d a corpus of about 1,300 cookie banners presented on the most popular English-speaking websites visited by users residing in the EU. We randomly selected and manually coded 407 of these banners, ﬁnding that 89% of banners violated at least one legal requirement concerning processing p urposes and consent. In particular, 20% of banners violated the purpose availability requirement as they did not mention any processing purpose. Mo re than 50% of banners unlawfully mentioned the widely used but rather vague purpo se: “user experience enhancement”. Further, 30% used positive framing, breaching the freely given and informed consent requirements. Our ﬁndings suggest that many cookie banners use unlawful and questionable practices to obtain user consent. Our contributio ns are as follows: (1) We analyzed relevant legal sources and extracted six legal requirements explaining how cookie banner text should describe purposes of data collection and use; (2) We mapped legal requirements and their violations to observable linguistic features; (3) We empirically demonstrated that the wording used in cookie banners did not co mply with ePD and GDPR; (4) We provided a set of reco mmendations that regulators and policymakers can ﬁnd useful. Within the security and privacy domain, prior work has sought to assess the comprehensibility of alert messages and warnings [4, 25– 27, 30, 31, 66, 68], privacy policies [69, 72], contr actual terms [10, 48], browser disclosures [1, 2], and security and privacy advice on the web [58]. These studies have generally shown that privacyrelated text is long and diﬃcu lt to understand since it is overly complex and full of legalese [61], casting doubt on how informed users are w hen they make decisions with regard to the collection of t heir personal data. Moreover, the typical use of vague quantiﬁers (e.g., ‘certain’, ‘some’) [ 59] and modality markers (e.g., ‘may’, ‘might’) in privacy-related text makes it challenging for users to assess the data collection p ractices of organizations [57]. Further, scholars and regulators have shown that certain linguistic strategies may inﬂuence users’ o nline decisions by toying with users’ emotions [36]; e.g., shame [44], guilt [18], bl ame [19], or fear [15]. With regard to the analysis of coo kie banner text, Utz et al. [71] showed that purposes were expressed in generic terms in almost half of the analyzed banners (e.g., “to improve user experience”) and were unspeciﬁed in one out of six banners. In their empirical work, Hausner et al. [39] argued that positive framing (e.g., “Yes, I am happy!”) could be used to nudge users toward giving their consent, whereas conﬁguration options used to refuse or manage consent were expressed neutrally in banners. Similarly, Kampanos et al. [41] showed that most banners presented “aﬃrmative” options that could nudge users toward consenting to tracking, whereas options like “Read more” and “I do not accept” were less prevalent. The remaining literature on how users’ consent to the use of cookies is requested exclusively focused on the UI design of cookie banners [9, 37, 38, 49, 71]. We build on prior work [37, 45, 62] and employ user-centric transparency criteria [55] to establish a benchmark that can be used to assess whether consent banner text is ePD- and GDPRcompliant. We use an inductive approach to investigating transparency issues (ambiguity, vagueness, technical jargon, misleading statements, and framing) through expert annotation of banner text. Data collection. Using the Tranco list [43], we created a dataset of about 1,300 cookie banners presented on the most visited Englishspeaking websites by users residing in the EU (in March 2020). We used the Polyglot l ibr ary [5] to detect the website language and then scrape English-speaking websites. T he resulting set included both European and non-European domains. To scrape websites, we used OpenWPM [28], a web privacy measurement framework based on Selenium [64]. It allowed full-page rendering before analysis and enabled taking screenshots of speciﬁc site elements. To detect cookie banners, we followed three steps: segmentation, scoring, and tree traversal. First, we segmented webpages into small segments and bu il t a segment tree [44] based on the segments’ HTML tag and text. Second, we assigned a score to each segment based on its inner text using a vocabulary set that we created by analyzing cookie banner content. We ranked tree leaf segments according to their scores. Third, we used the highest-scoring segments to traverse our segment tree. We performed bottom-up and top-down tree traversals. We captured HTML elements that contained cookie banners. To reduce false positives (i.e., websites with no banners), we used the segment scores to decide whether a cookie banner existed based on a threshold we set. We then manually ﬁltered out any remaining false positives. Legal requirements applicable to banner text. We analyzed various legal documents (ePD, GDPR, case law, regulatory decisions, and guidelines of non-binding sources like the E uropean Data Protection Board (EDPB) and Data Protection Authorities (DPAs)) and extracted six legal requ irements applicable to cookie banner text [ 62] (the requirements and their violations are described in Table 1 and further detailed in Table 3). The ﬁrst two requirements (R1, R2) mandate that the pur poses of personal data processing should be described in an explicit and speciﬁc manner (Article 5(1)(b) GDPR) [6, 33]. The other requirements (R3, R4, R5, R6) relate to the validity of consent, which should be intelligible, expressed in clear and plain language, freely given, and informed (Articles 4(11), 7(2)(4) GDPR) [13]. Without explicit and speciﬁc purposes and without valid consent, websites may be found to infringe the GDPR’s principle of lawfulness (Article 6 (1)(a)), which would render any subsequent data processing unlawful and subject to heavy ﬁnes (Article 83 (5)(a) GDPR).Banner text coding. The legal requirements we extracted (and their violations) were mapped to codes that we used to cap ture ob servable textual elements. Based on annotating our cookie banner set (described next), we identiﬁed ﬁve main cod es: purpose of banners (see Table 2), framing, misleading language, vagueness, and technical jargon. We – a multidisciplinary team of ﬁve researchers with diverse expertise in data protection law, computer science, linguistics, and HCI – iteratively coded a set of 150 banners (three iterations in total) using MAXQDA. We weekly met to develop our codebook until we reached good interrater agreement calculated for each pair of coders. Agreement ranged from 0 .71 to 0.8 (Cohen’s kappa coefﬁcient) for all six pairs. We use d the ﬁnal codebook to annotate 407 banners that we randomly selected from the dataset we created. We analyzed the ﬁrst layer of cookie banners without considering the second layer where the cookie policy can usually be found. Our R.1.2 UnambiguityAmbiguous inte nt [6] R.1.3 Shared common un-Inconsistent purposes [6]. derstanding R3.2 ConcisenessProlixity [14, 20, 24] R4 Consent with clear and plain language R4.1 Straightforward state-Misleading expressions [20, 22, 24, 55, 56] ments R4.2 ConcretenessIndeﬁnite qualiﬁers [13, 55] R5 Freely given consent Pressure to provide consent [13, 19, 34, 55] Table 1: A description of six legal requirements applicable to cookie banner text. choice was motivated by prior studies showing that many users simply disregard the second layer of consent requests [47, 70, 71] and make decisions exclusively based on the ﬁ rst layer. Additionally, transparency requirements mandate that the ﬁrst layer of banners should give users a clear overview of data collection and processing [55] and that the second layer should be consistent with the ﬁrst one [55]. We present the ﬁndings of analyzing the text of 407 cookie banners. We also discuss the compliance of these banners with the six legal req uirements we extracted. We found that 80% of banners explained the purpose of data collection and processing. More than one-half of banners did not use misleading wording to explain purposes of processing, and about two-thirds of b anners did not employ framing. Furt her, around 90% of banners did not use vague language and technical jargon. However, 89% of banners violated at least one out of six legal requirements considered in this study, as detailed below. Absence of purposes. 20% of banners did not mention the purpose of data processing although several DPAs [8, 40, 51, 52] mandate transparent disclosure of purposes even for strictly necessary cookies that do not require user consent. Hiding the reason for data processing violated the purpose availability (R1.1) and informed consent (R6) req uirements. Categories of purpose. We identiﬁed eight d iﬀerent categories of purpose described in cookie banner text. We explain these cat egories in order of occu rrence (from the most to the least recurring): user experience enhancement, analytics, advertising, custom content, service o ﬀering, essential functionalities, social media features, and p roﬁling. The exact distribution of categories is shown in Table 2. We identiﬁed our categories by annotating banner text. Future work can map these categories to the ones created by several DPAs [13, 24, 51]. Wording used to describe purposes. We found a wide range of terms used to describe the purpose of data collection and processing, which often did not clearly match the eight categories we identiﬁed. For example, Advertising was also referred to as marketing (content), targeted/tailored ads, ad(s) delivery/personalization/measurement, and promotional oﬀers. Essential functionalities were referred to as basic fu nctions/functioning, operation of website, optimal website provision, and user preferences. Hence, the use of diﬀerent terms to describe the same purpose did not comply with the common understanding (R1.3) requirement and raised the question about whether users could map diﬀerent terms to the same concept. Most often mentioned purposes. The user experience enhancement p urpose appeared in 61% of banners that explained the purpose(s) of data processing. However, it was unclear how cookies improved the user experience of website visitors. It was also unclear w hether certain cookies were necessary for the website to operate properly (e.g., adapting the presentation of website content to the user screen size [53, 54]). DPAs and the EDPB [6, 24] explain that such wording should not be used due to its vagueness and ambiguity. Thus, almost one-half of banners breached the spe c iﬁcit y (R2), unambiguity (R1.2), and plain language (R4) requirements. Analytics was the second most mentioned pur pose, appearing in 33% of banners that described the p urpose(s) of data processing. Since data could be collected and processed by ﬁrst and/or third parties in aggregate or anonymously, the chosen wording violat ed the speciﬁcity (R2) requirement. We recall that third-party analytics entail the risk of cookie synchronization between diﬀerent websites and, thus, that of proﬁling [21]. Proﬁling was mentioned in 8% of all banners that explained the purpose(s) of data processing, but it was rarely mentioned explicitly. More often, based on o ur interpretation of banner text, we recognized implicit mentions of the proﬁling purpose: “[...] combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services”, viol ating the unambiguity (R1.2) and speciﬁcity of purposes (R2) requirements. Multiple purposes. Some banners described a host of diﬀerent processing purposes u sing a single sentence. For example, “[...] to derive insights about the audiences who saw ads and content” bundles up three purposes – analytics, advertising, and proﬁling – into one sentence. This violated the requirement of p urpose speciﬁcity (R2) and possibly that of unambiguity (R1.2). Misleading statement s. Misleading statements used to describe purposes were identiﬁed in 42% of banners. They include d descriptions that were vague, confusing, and ambiguous; were framed positively or negatively; instilled false beliefs; or concealed important information (i.e., deceiving the user [17]). Examples included the following: “We use cookies that do not contain personal data about you in order to personalize content and ads”. Some statements were misleading due to framing, vagueness, or use of t echnical jargon. Framing of purposes. Positive framing was used in 30% o f banners describing purposes through the use of superlatives like ‘best’ and ‘most optimal’ (e.g., “We use cookies to deliver the best possible web experience”). Positive framing was mainly used to describe the user experi e nce enhancement purpose, c laiming that cookies optimized website performance o r improved user experience. Highlighting the positive aspects of consenting to cookie processing Table 2: A description of eight data processing purposes we identiﬁed based on analyzing cookie banner text. provided a partial view, making users pay less attention to other aspects that could be deemed negative (e.g., targeted advertising) [17] but key to making informed decisions. Thus, positive framing violated the freely given (R5) and informed consent (R6) requirements. Negative framing was only used in 2% of banners, mainly to warn users of the loss of functionalities if users did not consent to the use of cookies; e.g., “If you’re not happy with this, we won’t set these cookies but some nice features of the site may be unavailable ”. When choices are framed negatively, they may put pressure on u sers by exploiting loss aversion [3] and nudge them toward consenting [19], especially when it is unclear which functionalities will be lost. Our previous study [15] showed that people may develop wrong mental models o f t he consequences of (not) consenting to data collection and processing. Therefore, both positive and negative framing may nudge users toward complying with the service provider’s wishes [34], violating the freely given consent (R5) requirement. Necessary v s . unnecessar y cookies. Additionally, we found that cookie banner text did not explain the diﬀerence between necessary and unnecessary cookies. Therefore, non-expert users may be misled to believe that all cookies are necessary for websites to operate properly [11, 65, 67]. For example, “This website or its thirdparty tools use cookies, which are necessary to its functioning and required to achieve the pu rposes illustrated in th e cookie policy” is a misleading statement because it claims that all cookies are key to proper website functionality, making users’ consent uninformed and viol ating the speciﬁcity (R2), unambiguity (R1.2), clear and plain language (R4), and informed consent (R6) requirements. Vaguenes s . 11% of banners used vague terms to describe purposes: “We may share information about your u se of the site with third parties; we may use co okies”. Vagueness is misleading when it leaves individuals uncertain about the intended meaning o f an expression [57, 61], in particular whether cookies are used and whether data is shared with other parties. The user experience enhancement and service provision purposes – mentioned cumulatively in more than one-half of banners – could also be deemed misleading if proven untrue, especially that vague language does not explain how accepting cookies is beneﬁcial to users [6, 20, 24, 46]. Technical jargon and prolixity. The description of purposes in 9% of banners contained technical jargon, including “derive insights about the audi e nces”, “retargeting cookies”, and “Google Analytics”, breaching the requirements of intelligibility (R3) and st raightforward statements (R4.1). While examples or explanations can cl ar ify technical terms, they can still breach the conciseness (R3.2) requirement given the limited size of cookie banners. Empirical studies should be conducted to assess the comprehensibility of technical terms by diﬀerent audiences, although some prior studies [16, 63, 67, 71] have shown that the use of technical jargon could leave users in a vul nerable state. Recommendations. Based on our ﬁndings, we provide reco mmendations that regulators and policymakers can ﬁnd useful. Standardization of purposes. Given that people may have diﬀerent interpretations of the same text, we argue that most consensual purposes (e.g., advertising, stat istical analysis, social me dia features, personalization) and their labels should be st andardized, following Privacy by Design [60]. The violations we identiﬁed in this work are rooted in the fact that websites can describe purposes at their own discretion. The EDPB, DPAs, and standard committees should standardize purpose c ategories to minimize l egal uncertainty and simplify data processing operatio ns. Requirements for describing purposes. The legal req uirements that currently exist are generic and diﬃcult to operationalize. Therefore, there is a need for a set of requirements that can be used to help deﬁne purposes of dat a processing. We al so ar gue that creating a blacklist of illegal purposes could improve the current situation. A simple nomenclature l ike ‘necessary’ and ‘unnecessary’ cookies could improve users’ comp rehensibility o f cookie banner text and help users make informe d decisions, provided that details about purposes of data processing can be found in cookie policies. Yet, from a user’s point of view, we believe the best solution would be managing cookie consent options pre-emptively at the browser level or through an automated browser extension. Language tensions. Best practices and examples of how to clearly refer to data privacy concepts while remaining concise should also be made available to website providers, since attempts to comply with the explicitness, speciﬁcity, and plain language legal requirements could also lead to prolixity. In this work, we analyzed the text describing the data processing purposes of 407 cookie banners. We found that 89% of banners violated at least one legal requirement. 20% of banners did not mention any purpose although purpose disclosure is legally mandated. Notably, 67% of banners violated the speciﬁcity requirement, and 61% unlawfully provided a vague purpose: “user experience enhancement”. 31% of banners used framing, breaching the freely given consent requirement. Other identiﬁed issues included misleading statements, technical jargon, and vagueness. We argue that the identiﬁed violatio ns do not allow users to be aware of the scope, consequences, and risks (Recital 39 GDPR) of consenting to storing cookies on their devices, especially the privacy-invasive ones and, as a result, breaching the principle of transparency that governs personal data processing (Article 5(1)(a) GDPR). It is not only d iﬃcult for lay users to understand cookie banner t ext, but also experts may ﬁnd it challenging to parse banner text and map it to relevant l egal requirements. This suggests that, b esides necessary standardization, a purpose-based consent may neither be user-friendly nor feasible and, hence, we argue that unnecessary coo kies should be rejected by default. We will build on this work and conduct user studies to empirically evaluate the comp rehensibility o f diﬀerent textual elements of banners. We will investigate the inﬂuence of positive and negative framing on users’ choices. We will also seek to create a taxonomy of commonly understandable purposes to facilitat e comprehensibility, comparability, and compliance checking. It would also be useful to use natural language processing (NLP) to automate, for example, the detection of misleading text as well as use sentiment analysis to identify positive and negative framing. This work has been partially suppor ted by the Luxembou rg National Research Fund (FNR) – IS/14717072 “Deceptive Patterns Online (Decepticon)”. We thank Nataliia Bielova, Claude Casteluccia, Rémy Coudert, and Michael Toth for their input and for designing and building the crawler used to create the dataset of banners.