impacts have prompted signiﬁcant interest in opinion formation and evolution within social networks. In this work, we study how local dynamics in a network can drive opinion polarization. In particular, we study time evolving networks under the classic Friedkin-Johnsen opinion model. Edges are iteratively added or deleted according to simple local rules, modeling decisions based on individual preferences and network recommendations. a related measure of disagreement across edges. Via simulations on synthetic and real-world graphs, we ﬁnd that the presence of two simple dynamics gives rise to high polarization: 1) conﬁrmation bias – i.e., the preference for nodes to connect to other nodes with similar expressed opinions and 2) friend-of-friend link recommendations, which encourage new connections between closely connected nodes. We also investigate the role of ﬁxed connections which are not subject to these dynamics. We ﬁnd that even a small number of ﬁxed edges can signiﬁcantly limit polarization, but still lead to multimodal opinion distributions, which may be considered polarized in a diﬀerent sense. Over the last twenty years, the rise of massive social media platforms has signiﬁcantly increased the speed and bandwidth of information sharing and human interaction around the globe. While increased availability of information and richer online interactions are positive eﬀects of this social shift, there is increasing concern about the ability of social media platforms to polarize and divide us [HN12, LCKK14, Del20, BG08, GMJCK13]. This polarization seems to be driven by both established factors of human social dynamics, along with new dynamics, driven by the revenue maximizing behavior of the social media platforms themselves. An example of a human behavior driving polarization is conﬁrmation bias, the tendency to avoid information that challenges our own views, while actively seeking information that conﬁrms them [Nic98]. The role of conﬁrmation bias is ampliﬁed on social media platforms due to an increased availability of opinion conﬁrming content. Indeed, conﬁrmation bias is thought to be a key driver of the online spread of conspiracy theories and fake news in recent years [TJ19, PS21]. This includes, for example, driving vaccine hesitancy in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic [MSFD19]. An example of the behavior of social media platforms themselves driving polarization is the use of recommender systems, which use algorithms to ﬁlter and deliver content that maximizes user engagement and revenue. Such recommendations can create ﬁlter bubbles, which further strengthen the power of conﬁrmation bias and drive polarization [Par12, LCKK14, GMJCK13]. We seek to understand how local edge updates (i.e., insertions and deletions) driven by both human behavior and the behavior of social media platforms, may cause opinion polarization. We introduce a simple model of network and opinion coevolution, which captures the eﬀects of both conﬁrmation bias and recommender systems, while remaining tractable to theoretical analysis and eﬃcient simulation. This model is detailed in Section 2, and summarized below. Opinion Dynamics and Polarization. We use the classic Friedkin-Johnsen opinion dynamics model, [FJ90], which models how individuals’ expressed opinions (represented as real numbers) are inﬂuenced by their innate opinions, along with the expressed opinions of their neighbors in a network. A node’s innate opinion is ﬁxed at initialization, and its expressed opinion at any time is an average of this innate opinion with the expressed opinions of its neighbors. We consider two metrics studied in prior work [MMT18]: opinion polarization, which is the variance of the expressed opinions, and disagreement, which is the total squared diﬀerence of expressed opinions across all edges in the network. Under the Friedkin-Johnsen model, polarization and disagreement tend to counteract each other – with low disagreement, nodes tend to be connected to other nodes with similar opinions, and polarization tends to be high. With high disagreement, nodes are connected to other nodes with a diversity of opinions, limiting polarization. Leveraging prior work [MMT18, XBZ21], both values can be computed in closed form in terms of the graph structure and the innate opinions, making them tractable for both theoretical and empirical investigation. Edge Dynamics Model. We consider a model where the network and the expressed opinions of nodes coevolve over time. At each time step, users within the network stochastically delete connections to some of their neighbors. To model conﬁrmation bias, edges with higher expressed opinion disagreement are deleted with higher probability. At each step, users also add edges to new neighbors. To model recommender systems, these edges are added to random friend-of-friends – i.e., two-hop connections in the network. Friend-of-friend recommendations are a popular form of edge recommendations made by social media platforms [SSG16, DGM10]. Simulation and Theoretical Analysis. Our main contribution is to study how the above opinion and edge dynamics interact and drive opinion polarization. We start with an initial graph, either randomly generated from an established model, or taken from a snapshot of a real social network. We also start with innate opinions, which are randomly generated over the interval [−1, 1]. We then run our edge and opinion dynamics models, recording how node opinions and the corresponding polarization, disagreement, and other graph properties evolve over time. We give theoretical bounds that explain some aspects of this evolution, although a more complete theoretical justiﬁcation for our ﬁndings would be a very interesting direction for future work. Our main ﬁndings are as follows: Conﬁrmation bias and recommendations drive polarization. We ﬁnd that, when both conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend link recommendations are part of the edge dynamics model, the network becomes highly polarized – where nodes are mostly connected to other nodes with similar innate opinions. Thus, these nodes have similar expressed opinions, and polarization nearly reaches its maximum value, the variance of the innate opinions (see Sec 3.1). If either one of these dynamics is removed, and if edge additions and/or removals are just made randomly, polarization stagnates at a low level. This ﬁnding is generally robust to the initial graph structure and innate opinion distribution, with the exception of dense random graphs, where friend-of-friend recommendations lose their power – they are essentially the same as random recommendations. See Figure 1 for an illustration for two representative initial graphs. Figure 1: Opinion polarization plotted over time for both an Erd¨os-Renyi graph and a Twitter social network [MMT18]. Innate opinions are uniformly distributed in [−1, 1]. With edge dynamics inﬂuenced by both conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend recommendations, polarization quickly asymptotes to a near maximum. When either factor is removed, polarization remains low. Three stages of polarization. When edge dynamics incorporate both conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend recommendations, regardless of the initial graph structure, the opinions tend to evolve in a predictable three-stage pattern. See Figure 2. Initially, due to the averaging in the Friedkin-Johnsen model, opinions converge towards the mean and polarization is low. Next, as disagreeable edges are removed and friend-of-friend connections added, the opinion distribution becomes approximately bimodal. The polarization is still relatively low – modes are relatively close to the average opinion. Finally, in the third stage, these modes ‘collapse’, as nodes ﬁnd more and more agreeable neighbors to connect to. The opinion distribution converges towards the innate opinion distribution and polarization increases. When the innate opinion distribution is uniformly random in a range, the expressed opinion distribution has many modes corresponding to groups of nodes connected to others with similar innate opinions. These groups can be thought of informally as lying within the same ‘ﬁlter bubbles’. Fixed edges limit polarization. We also consider ﬁxing a small percentage of edges at initialization, which are not subject to our deletion dynamics. These edges can be thought of as modeling connections that are independent of opinions or recommendations, e.g., to family members or cothe above ﬁnding is far from obvious. In the Friedkin-Johnsen model, a node’s expressed opinion is heavily inﬂuenced by node’s expressed opinion will depend very little on its innate opinion. Thus, it is not clear that removing disagreeable edges (where disagreement is with respect to the expressed opinions) and adding friend-offriend edges will tend towards a polarized network, where nodes with similar innate opinions are connected. We also found it surprising that both friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias were required to drive polarization, initially conjecturing that just conﬁrmation bias would suﬃce. It seems that recommender systems act as a key catalyst in amplifying human behavior that favors polarization. Explaining this phenomenon theoretically would be very interesting. workers. We prove a theoretical bound, showing that the existence of such edges caps polarization at a certain level (see Sec. 3.1 for details). We observe that in simulations, the actual eﬀect of these edges is even more signiﬁcant than predicted by this bound, reducing polarization greatly. See Fig. 3. Figure 2: Stages of opinion polarization for an Erd¨os-Renyi graph, with innate opinions uniformly distributed in [−1, 1]. Plots are histograms of the expressed opinions at t = 20, t = 60, and t = 400 time steps. Colors represent 5 independent trials. In Stage 1, the opinions initially center around 0, due to opinion averaging in the Friedkin-Johnsen model. In Stage 2 they diverge into a clear bimodal distribution. Finally, in Stage 3, these modes collapse and the expressed opinions converge closer to the innate opinions, with many modes of highly similar and interconnected nodes. In this stage, polarization is very high. We also ﬁnd that ﬁxed edges tend to halt the polarization process in its second stage, where the expressed opinion distribution centers around the mean, with a few modes. While the expressed opinion variance (our measure of polarization) in this state may be low, arguably, the opinions are still polarized. In fact, it has been argued that perceived high polarization does not necessarily correspond to an actual increase in opinion variance [CBI06, LM16]. Several works consider polarization in the sense of bimodality of opinions, rather than their variance [DVZ03, MRUW21]. simulations of our model, we also give theoretical bounds which illustrate how individual edge removals and insertions can drive polarization and disagreement in the Friedkin-Johnsen model. We show that swapping an edge with large expressed opinion disagreement across it, for a new edge with small expressed opinion disagreement, monotonically drives up the sum of the polarization and disagreement metrics in the graph, a combined quantity studied in prior work [MMT18]. Since this swap also tends to drive down disagreement, it thus tends to drive up polarization. However, proving this formally remains open. Our theoretical ﬁndings align with and help explain our simulation results. With conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend recommendations, in our dynamic network model, highly disagreeable edges tend to be swapped for more agreeable friend-of-friends. These swaps tend to drive the graph to a highly polarized state. We hope that our theoretical results are also a ﬁrst step towards a better theoretical understanding of various phenomena in our model, such as the threestage opinion evolution, the power of ﬁxed edges to limit polarization, and the necessity of friendof-friend connections rather than random connections to drive polarization. Polarization and its connection to recommender systems and opinion dynamics has seen signiﬁcant research interest, particularly in the wake of Pariser’s 2012 ‘ﬁlter bubble’ hypothesis [Par12]. A number of papers consider the effect of link recommendations, including friend-of-friend recommendations, on network structure [DGM10, SSG16]. Others consider the eﬀect of edge rewiring and innate opinion perturbation on polarization, including within the FriedkinJohnsen model [MMT18, AKPT18, CR20, pact. Unlike our work, they do not consider how opinions and the underlying network coevolve and drive polarization over time. Several works do consider opinion and network coevolution [HN06, CFL09, DGL13, BLSSS20, SCP20]. A common ﬁnding, matching our observations, is that edge updates driven by conﬁrmation bias (also called homophily), are not themselves suﬃcient to drive polarization [DGL13, SCP20]. Dandekar et al. [DGL13] introduce another psychological factor in their model, biased assimilation, in which nodes that are presented a mixture of opinions give undue support to their initial opinion. They show that, in combination with conﬁrmation bias, this dynamic drives polarization. Sasahara et al. [SCP20] present a model in which a user’s expressed opinion only takes into account suﬃciently agreeable neighbors. They show that this behavior, along with conﬁrmation bias, drive the network into a bimodal opinion distribution. They also show that direct recommendations of agreeable edges accelerate polarization. The above works can be seen as complementary to ours. They use custom opinion dynamics models, rather than the standard Friedkin-Johnsen model as we do. They also do not consider the eﬀect of ﬁxed edges or friend-of-friend link recommendations, focusing instead on other important dynamics that can drive polarization. Contrasting our work, some works suggest that recommendation systems can actually mitigate ﬁlter bubble eﬀects [NHH14, AGS20] . These works focus on diversity of content consumption, showing that it can be increased by natural collaborative ﬁltering based recommendations. Other works propose remedies to ‘ﬁx’ recommender systems to limit their polarizing eﬀect [CKSV19, HMRU21]. It would be interesting to understand the eﬀects of these remedies in our opinion and edge dynamics model. We start by laying out theoretical preliminaries, and the details of our model of opinion formation under local edge dynamics. We work with the Friedkin-Johnsen opinion model [FJ90]. There are n individuals, connected by an undirected graph G with Laplacian matrix L ∈ R s ∈ R, whose entries represent each individual’s opinion, without inﬂuence from the network. Node opinions are numerically coded along the interval [−1, 1], and for simplicity we will always assume that they have mean 0. An expressed opinion vector z ∈ R under inﬂuence from their neighbors. z is obtained by repeatedly applying the opinion averaging update: z(i) :=, where wis the weight of the edge between node i and node j. For simplicity, we only consider unweighted graphs, where w there is an edge. This update converges to an equilibrium, with z = (I + L) We note that there are a vast number of alternative opinion dynamics models other than Friedkin-Johnsen [DeG74, HK02, EF18, SCP20]. Understanding how robust our results are to the choice of underlying opinion dynamics model would be very interesting. In our model, the network and the expressed opinions coevolve over time. The innate opinions are ﬁxed at initialization. Let L∈ Rdenote the network Laplacian at time t, and z denote the expressed opinions. At each time step, we compute a set of edges to be removed and a set of edges to be added to G. These sets typically depend on the expressed opinions z removals and additions, Lis updated to L, and the process continues. Edge Removals. We ﬁx a percentage p of the current number of edges in the graph to be removed – typically 10%. We then select the set to be removed according to a probability distribution. In the baseline control, this distribution is uniform. To model conﬁrmation bias, the distribution is based on the expressed opinion disagreement across each edge. Edge (u, v) will be removed with probability proportional to |z(i) − z(j)|. In this way, nodes tend to remove connections to other nodes that express conﬂicting opinions, while keeping edges that conﬁrm their own expressed opinion. We sample k = bp · ec edges to be removed according to this probability distribution, without replacement, where e is the number of edges in the graph. In experiments where we set a percentage of ﬁxed edges in the graph, the ﬁxed edges simply have sampling probability set to 0. We then iterate over the sampled edges, removing each in turn, unless doing so would leave a vertex with no edges. Once this check has been completed for each of the k edges, we report the number of successful edge deletions r, where r ≤ k. Edge Additions. Given the number of edges r which were removed at the current step, we select r edges to be inserted. For the control, we simply sample r edges that are not currently in the graph uniformly at random, and add these edges. To model friend-of-friend recommendations, we select r edges iteratively. We select a random node and compute its ‘friend-of-friends’ set – i.e., its two-hop neighbors. We then select one of these friend-of-friends uniformly at random and add an edge to that node to an ‘addition set’. The process continues until there are r edges in the addition set, at which point all of the new edges are added to the graph. The primary quantities that we measure as the network L over time are the polarization and disagreement. The polarization is the variance of the expressed opinions, a common choice in the literature [MMT18, AKPT18, BP20]. The disagreement measures the variance of expressed opinions just across edges in the graph. It is high if nodes tend to be connected to other nodes with very diﬀerent opinions and low if nodes tend to be connected to other nodes with similar opinions. As shown in [MMT18], in the Friedkin-Johnsen model, the polarization and disagreement can be written as quadratic forms involving the network Laplacian and the mean-centered innate opinion vector. For simplicity, we assume throughout that our innate opinions have mean 0, and so meancentering is unnecessary. Fact 1 (Polarization). Consider a graph with Laplacian matrix L ∈ R innate opinion vector s ∈ R. Let z = (I + L) Johnsen model. The polarization is given by Fact 2 (Disagreement). Consider a graph with Laplacian matrix L ∈ R innate opinion vector s ∈ R. Let z = (I + L) Johnsen model. The disagreement is given by Due to its simple formulation as a quadratic form over (I + L) will often work with the polarization + disagreement, introduced in [MMT18] and deﬁned below. Fact 3 (Polarization + Disagreement). Consider the settings of Facts 1 and 2. The polarization+ disagreement is given by In our setting, s is ﬁxed at initialization, and so we typically drop the second argument, writing the polarization, disagreement and polarization + disagreement at time t as P (L P D(L). s be the expressed opinion vector in the Friedkin- (I + L)s. s be the expressed opinion vector in the Friedkin- Lz = s(I + L)L(I + L)s. We next present our theoretical results, which establish basic properties of polarization in the Friedkin-Johnsen model, and its behavior under edge insertions and deletions. From Fact 1 we can derive a simple upper bound on the polarization, which will be useful in understanding our simulation results. Proposition 4. Consider a graph with Laplacian matrix L ∈ R opinion vector s ∈ R. We have I.e., the polarization is upper bounded by the innate opinion variance. Proof. Since L is positive semideﬁnite, all eigenvalues of I + L are at least 1. Thus, all eigenvalues of (I +L)are at most 1. Thus, using Fact 1, P (L, s) = s where k(I + L)kdenotes the matrix spectral norm. For a graph consisting of a ﬁxed set of edges, along with some dynamically changing edges, we can also upper bound the polarization by the polarization+disagreement in just the ﬁxed graph. As we will see in Section 4.4, this partially, but not completely, explains the power of ﬁxed edges in limiting polarization in our model. Proposition 5. Consider a graph with Laplacian matrix L = L Laplacians for any subset of edges in the graph. For a mean 0 innate opinion vector s ∈ R have Proof. Recall the standard Loewner ordering on positive semideﬁnite matrices, where M  N denote that N − M is positive semideﬁnite. We have P (L, s) ≤ P D(L, s) = s s(I + L)s = P D(L, s). The inequality follows from the fact that L (I + L). We might hope to strengthen Prop. 5 by bounding P (L, s) ≤ P (L showing that (I +L) (I +L). However, L since L and Lmight not commute. Proving a tighter bound and better explaining the power of ﬁxed edges in limiting polarization in our model is an interesting open question. Using the linear algebraic expressions for polarization and disagreement in Section 2.3, we can also understand how these quantities evolve as edges are added and removed from the graph. We consider a simpliﬁed setting in which just a single edge (u time. This can be represented by the update L Laplacian for (u, v). That is, E(u, u) = E(v, v also write E= χχwhere χ∈ Ris the edge indicator vector with a 1 at position u and a −1 at position v. Adding Erepresents an edge addition, and subtracting E , s).  L does not imply that (I +L) (I +L), = L± Ewhere E∈ Ris a rank-1 edge ) = 1 and E(u, v) = E(v, u) = −1. We can removal. We only allow adding an edge not currently in the graph and removing one in the graph. This ensures that Lremains a valid unweighted graph Laplacian. We compute the update in polarization + disagreement under edge additions/deletions via the Sherman-Morrison formula [SM50]. Lemma 6 (P+D – Edge Addition). Consider any unweighted graph Laplacian L ∈ R s, z ∈ Rbe the innate and corresponding expressed opinion vectors in the Friedkin-Johnson model. Let E ∈ Rbe the edge Laplacian for edge (u, v). Let δ = z(u)−z(v) and r We defer the proof of Lemma 6 to the appendix. Note that r eﬀective resistance between (u, v) in the graph given by L plus a small copy of the complete graph [Spi19]. It will be small if (u, v) are algebraically well-connected. For any L and (u, v) we have r≥ 0 and r≤ kχk≤ 2. This yields: Corollary 7 (P+D – Edge Addition Bounds). Consider the setting of Lemma 6. P D(L) − δ P D(L + E) ≤ P D(L) − δ/3. Symmetrically, for edge deletions, we have: Lemma 8 (P+D – Edge Deletion). Consider any unweighted graph Laplacian L ∈ R s, z ∈ Rbe the innate and corresponding expressed opinion vectors in the Friedkin-Johnson model. Let E ∈ Rbe the edge Laplacian for edge (u, v). Let δ = z(u)−z(v) and r Since we assume that (u, v) is already in the graph when it is deleted, r (0, 1]. This gives: Corollary 9 (P+D – Edge Deletion Bounds). Consider the setting of Lemma 8. P D(L − E) ≥ P D(L) + δ Overall, from Corollaries 7 and 9 we see that adding an edge decreases the polarization + disagreement. Subtracting an edge increases it. In both cases, the magnitude of change is roughly linear in the squared disagreement across the edge. Building on the above results, we next consider how P D(L) changes when a disagreeable edge is swapped out for a more agreeable one. Our main result is Corollary 11: if there is a suﬃcient gap in disagreement across pair (i, j) and pair (k, `), then removing edge (i, j) and adding (k, `) will strictly increase the polarization + disagreement. Thus, as long as there remain edges in the graph with higher disagreement than non-edges, swapping out disagreeable connections for agreeable ones will drive up P D(L). This ﬁnding helps explain why when both conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend recommendations are present, we see polarization consistently reaching a near maximum. In each iteration of 1 − χ(I + L)χ our edge dynamics, we remove disagreeable edges, and replace them with friend-of-friend connections. Initially, these friend-of-friend connections are somewhat random, but still more agreeable on average than the removed connections. As the graph becomes more polarized, disagreement drops. The randomly removed edges have lower disagreement than initially. At the same time, the recommended friend-of-friend connections tend to be even more agreeable on average, and polarization continues to increase. We remark that while our simulations see polarization increasing, our theoretical bounds refer only to the polarization + disagreement. Since disagreement usually decreases over time in our simulations, this distinction is unimportant – an increase in polarization + disagreement typically means an increase in polarization. However, understanding this fact formally, and giving theoretical bounds that directly apply to P (L) is a key open question. Lemma 10 (P+D – Edge Swap). Consider any unweighted graph Laplacian L ∈ R s, z ∈ Rbe an innate and corresponding expressed opinion vectors in the Friedkin-Johnson model. Let Ebe the edge Laplacian for edge (u, v) and δ for edge (u, v) and δ= z(u)−z(v). Assume that the edge (u to L. Let r= χ(I + L)χ, r= χ(I + L) where α =and |α| ≤. We defer the proof Lemma 10 to the appendix. It follows by applying Lemma 6 and 8 in sequence, and simplifying via a third application of the Sherman-Morrison formula. In a reasonably well connected graph, we will have r bounded by the eﬀective resistances of (u, v) and (u in PD(L) will be roughly−≥ δ−δ. Thus, adding a more agreeable edge and removing a more disagreeable one will increase PD monotonically. Formally, in the appendix we prove: Corollary 11 (PD Increase with Swap). Consider the setting of Lemma 10. If |δ then P D(L + E− E) > P D(L). We next discuss our experimental results simulating our opinion and edge dynamics model on synthetic and real world data. Synthetic Networks. We simulate our model on several random, undirected networks, drawn from the Erd¨os-Renyi (ER) and Barab´asi-Albert (BA) distributions. ER graphs are simple random graphs, where each pair of nodes is connected independently with probability p. We modulate this probability in our experiments to understand the eﬀects of network density on polarization. BA graphs are scale-free networks generated via a preferential attachment process. For these graphs, we modulate the primary parameter m, which determines the number of edges to attach from a new node to existing nodes as the graph is generated. = z(u) −z(v). Let Ebe the edge Laplacian χ, and r= χ(L + I + E)χ. Real-world Networks. We also simulate our model on several real-world networks. We preprocess all networks by computing their 2-core, which is a maximal subgraph such that each node has degree at least two. This eliminates the large number of single-edge nodes present in some of these datasets, which would distort the results. Basic graph parameters (after preprocessing) are listed below, with more details on the datasets given in Appendix B. Innate Opinions. To generate innate opinions on the interval [−1, 1] for each node, we employ two primary methods. For the ﬁrst, we just generate these opinions uniformly at random on [−1, 1]. For the second, we generate opinions from a bimodal mixture of two Gaussians, centered around means µ = ±0.5 with standard deviations σ = 0.2. We clip any opinions falling outside the range to its end points, although such opinions are relatively rare. Edge Dynamics. We employ the edge and opinion dynamics model detailed in Section 2.2. For all experiments, we report the average behavior over the course of 5 independent trials. Figure 4: Polarization over time for varying sizes n of Erd¨os-Renyi random graphs with expected degree 25 (i.e., 25(n − 1)/2 expected edges). Dynamics include both friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias. Innate opinions are distributed uniformly in [−1, 1] and thus we expect ksk= 1/3. We see that polarization quickly increases, asymptoting around this value after ≈ 100 iterations of our dynamics. This behavior holds for all but the smallest graph size, since this graph is very dense. See Sec. 4.2.1 for more details. Over a large enough time period, our edge dynamics with both conﬁrmation bias and friend-of-friend recommendations result in networks becoming nearly maximally polarized – i.e., the expressed opinion polarization nears the upper bound of ksk given in Prop. 4. See Fig 4 for an illustration of this ﬁnding on an ER random graph with uniform innate opinions. Polarization quickly increases before asymptoting near this maximum. This ﬁnding is robust to the initial graph size and structure. See Fig. 15, which shows the same behavior on several real-world datasets. For these graphs, polarization tends to asymptote at a lower value, but still near ksk. to the innate opinion distribution. See Figure 13 in Appendix C for an illustration with the bimodal innate opinion distribution described in Section 4.1. Isolating the eﬀects of friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias, we ﬁnd that replacing either with a random control (see Section 2.2), drastically decreases polarization. See Figures 1 and 5 for an illustration on an Erd¨os-Renyi random graph with 2500 nodes, along with the Twitter and Reddit datasets. Polarization is essentially constant with just friend-offriend recommendations, and it rises at a very slow rate with just conﬁrmation bias. For particularly dense graphs, the asymptotic behavior of our model with both friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias changes. In Fig. 6, we show the evolution of polarization for a set of Erd¨os-Renyi graphs with a ﬁxed number of nodes n and a varying connection probability p. We can see that denser graphs exhibit lower polarization at convergence, and that polarization also increases at a slower rate. Figure 6: Polarization for Erd¨os-Renyi random graphs with n = 1000 nodes, and varied connection probabilities. Dynamics include both friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias. We see a sharp decrease in polarization once the density passes a high enough threshold. clear threshold, which seems to be roughly when the average degree din a graph is large enough such that the friends-offriends set with size roughly (d)(at least in an ER graph) encompasses nearly all nodes. I.e., when d= pn, (d)&√ n, and so p & 1/n. In this case, friendof-friend recommendations at initialization are essentially uniformly random, mirroring our control setting. A more precise theoretical understanding of this behavior would be very interesting and would help clarify the importance of friend-of-friend recommendations in amplifying the polarizing eﬀects of conﬁrmation bias. Figure 7: Stages of polarization for Twitter, with innate opinions uniformly distributed in [−1, 1]. Plots are histograms of the expressed opinions at t = 20, t = 440, and t = 4000 time steps. Colors represent 5 independent trials. In Stage 1, the opinions center around 0. In Stage 2 they begin to bifurcate. Finally, in Stage 3, these modes collapse and the expressed opinions converge closer to the innate opinions, with many modes of highly similar and interconnected nodes and high polarization. For both synthetic graphs and real-world networks, using friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias, we ﬁnd that the evolution of expressed opinions adheres to a three stage dynamic: Stage 1: Opinions converge to be very close to the mean of the innate opinions – which is ≈ 0 in our setting. Polarization is low. Stage 2: Expressed opinions bifurcate, ”pulling apart” into two or three distinct clusters on either side of the mean, which move towards the extremes of the opinion vector over time. Polarization rises, and disagreement peaks. Stage 3: The clusters ”collapse”; nodes disperse and settle into many expressed opinion modes which correspond with their innate opinions. Polarization is near maximal. Disagreement is near zero. In Figures 2 and 7, we show this progression of stages in the expressed opinion for an ER random graph and the Twitter dataset, respectively. The disagreement over time for a Barab´asi-Albert graph is visualized in Figure 10, and disagreement over time for the Twitter dataset is shown in the appendix, in Fig. 17. Both plots show that disagreement in the network peaks during Stage 2. To further visualize these stages, in Fig. 8 we plot the evolution of individual node opinions over time for a Barab´asi-Albert graph. It seems that during Stage 3, friend-offriend recommendations combined with conﬁrmation bias based edge deletions work together to ﬁnd a near-optimal conﬁguration of edges (given a constrained number of edges), such that each node’s expressed opinion is as close to its innate opinion as possible (i.e. reducing disagreement). Figure 18 in the appendix, which corresponds with Fig. 4, shows the decrease over time in the mean squared error of the expressed opinion vector and the innate opinion vector. We can see that this closely mirrors the rise in polarization. Figure 8: Evolution of individual opinions on a Barab´asi-Albert graph with 1000 nodes and uniform random innate opinions. Each line represents the evolving expressed opinion of one node. The colors represent the innate opinions, ranging on a gradient from -1 (blue) to 1 (red). We see opinions initially grouped near 0 (Stage 1). We then clearly see the bifurcation of opinions (Stage 2), and ﬁnally, a spreading of opinions into clusters based on their innate opinions, causing maximal polarization (Stage 3). Finally, we consider the impact of ﬁxed edges that are not subject to conﬁrmation bias edge deletion. See Figure 9 for an example of results on a Barab´asi-Albert graph. Surprisingly, ﬁxing even a relatively small percentage of edges results in a notable decrease in polarization at convergence. In the ﬁgure, we also plot the measured polarization in just the ﬁxed graph, as described in Prop. 5. We note that these values, while lower than the asymptotic value observed without ﬁxed edges, serve only as loose bounds for the experimental results shown here – polarization Figure 10: Disagreement over time for n = 1000 and m = 10 Barab´asi-Albert random graphs with varying ﬁxed edges, normalized by number of edges. When no edges are ﬁxed, disagreement peaks in Stage 2 of the polarization process. When small numbers of edges are ﬁxed, disagreement asymptotes away from 0. Given the observation that polarization evolves through three distinct stages in progression towards convergence, in Fig. 11 we show that expressed opinions in networks with a suﬃcient percentage of ﬁxed edges never reach Stage 3. Rather, they get ”stuck” in Stage 2, as deﬁned in Sec. 4.3. The expressed opinions at convergence are characterized by large groupings near the mean. In the appendix, in Fig. 12, we also show the evolution of individual node opinions over time on a Barab´asi-Albert graph with 10% of edges ﬁxed. We again observe this clustering of node opinions around the mean at convergence. For the same graph, we plot the disagreement over time in Fig. 10. Observe that the network without ﬁxed edges peaks in disagreement during Stage 2. Conversely, for networks with ﬁxed edges, disagreement does not decrease after the initial increase – this coincides with the ﬁnding that expressed opinions are ”stuck” in Stage 2. Figure 11: Stages of opinion polarization for an Erd¨os-Renyi graph, with uniform innate opinions on the interval [−1, 1], and 10% of edges ﬁxed. Plots are histograms of the expressed opinions at t = 20 and t = 500 time steps. Colors represent 5 independent trials. In Stage 1, the opinions center around 0, due to opinion averaging. The Stage 2 plot shows that opinions in the ﬁxed edge setting do not reach Stage 3, instead converging at a distribution with a few clusters close to 0. In summary, we present a simple extension of the Friedkin-Johnsen opinion model, in which the opinions and the underlying network co-evolve with the inﬂuence of conﬁrmation bias and recommendations. Our ﬁndings open several interesting questions. Can we prove theoretically that a combination of friend-of-friend recommendations and conﬁrmation bias drive polarization? If yes, can we understand the large eﬀect of ﬁxed edges on opinion polarization, and prove a tighter upper bound? Answering these even for ER graphs with random innate opinions would be very interesting.